Grade Seven – World History and Geography: Medieval and Early Modern Times
How did the distant regions of the world become more interconnected through medieval and early modern times?
What were the multiple ways people of different cultures interacted at sites of encounter? What were the effects of their interactions?
How did the environment and technological innovations affect the expansion of agriculture, cities, and human population? What impact did human expansion have on the environment?
Why did many states and empires gain more power over people and territories over the course of medieval and early modern times?
How did major religions (Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, and Sikhism) and cultural systems (Confucianism, the Scientific Revolution, and the Enlightenment) develop and change over time? How did they spread to multiple cultures?
The medieval and early modern periods provide students with opportunities to study the rise and fall of empires, the diffusion of religions and languages, and significant movements of people, ideas, and products. Over this period, the regions of the world became more and more interconnected. Although societies were quite distinct from each other, there were more exchanges of people, products, and ideas in every century. For this reason, world history in this period can be a bewildering catalog of names, places, and events that impacted individual societies, while the larger patterns that affected the world are lost. To avoid this, the focus must be on questions that get at the larger world geographical, historical, economic, and civic patterns. To answer these questions, students study content-rich examples and case studies, rather than surveying all places, names, and events superficially. Students approach history not only as a body of content (such as events, people, ideas, or historical accounts) to be encountered or mastered, but as an investigative discipline. They analyze evidence from written and visual primary sources, supplemented by secondary sources, to form historical interpretations. Both in writing and speaking, they cite evidence from textual sources to support their arguments.
The thematic questions listed above relate to the following major changes that took place during medieval and early modern times:
Long-term growth, despite some temporary dips, in the world’s population, beyond any level reached in ancient times. A great increase in agricultural and city-dwelling populations in the world compared to hunters and gatherers, whose numbers steadily declined.
Technological advances that gave humans power to produce greater amounts of food and manufactured items, allowing global population to keep rising.
An increase in the interconnection and encounters between distant regions of the world. Expansion of long-distance sea-going trade, as well as commercial, technological, and cultural exchanges. By the first millennium BCE, these networks spanned most of Afroeurasia (the huge interconnected landmass that includes Africa, Europe, and Asia). In the Americas, the largest networks were in Mesoamerica and the Andes region of South America. After 1500 CE, a global network of intercommunication emerged.
The rise of more numerous and powerful kingdoms and empires, especially after 1450 CE, when gunpowder weapons became available to rulers.
Increasing human impact on the natural and physical environment, including the diffusion of plants, animals, and microorganisms to parts of the world where they had previously been unknown.
One of the great historical projects of the last few decades has been to shift from teaching Western Civilization, a narrative that put Western Europe at the center of world events in this period, to teaching world history. Decentering Europe is a complicated process, because themes, periods, narratives, and terminology of historical study was originally built around Europe. For example, the terms “medieval” and “early modern” were invented to divide European history into eras. Neither of the meanings of “medieval” – “middle” or “backward and primitive” – are useful for periodizing world history, or the histories of China, India, Southeast Asia, or Mesoamerica. Students can analyze the term “medieval” to uncover its Renaissance and Eurocentric biases, as a good introduction to the concept of history as an interpretative discipline in which historians investigate primary and secondary sources, and make interpretations based on evidence.
Themes and large questions offer cohesion to the world history course, but students also need to investigate sources in depth. For this, a useful concept is the site of encounter, a place where people from different cultures meet and exchange products, ideas, and technologies. A site of encounter is a specific place, such as Sicily, Quanzhou, or Tenochtitlán/Mexico City, and students analyze concrete objects, such as a porcelain vase or the image of a saint, exchanged or made at the site. As students investigate the exchanges that took place and the interactions of merchants, bureaucrats, soldiers, and artisans at the site, they learn to consider not only what was happening in one culture but also how cultures influenced each other. They also gain fluency in world geography through maps.
Although this framework covers the existing seventh grade content standards, it reorganizes the units. Each of the new units has investigative focus questions to guide instruction and concrete examples and case studies for in-depth analysis. The new units are:
1. The World in 300 CE (Interconnections in Afroeurasia and Americas)
2. Rome and Christendom, 300 CE to 1200 (Roman Empire, Development and Spread of Christianity, Medieval Europe, Sicily)
3. Southwestern Asia, 300 to 1200; World of Islam (Persia, Umayyad & Abbasid Caliphates, Development and Spread of Islam, Sicily, Cairo)
4. South Asia, 300 to 1200 (Gupta Empire, Spread of Hinduism and Buddhism, Srivijaya)
5. East Asia, 300 to 1300 (China during Tang & Song, spread of Buddhism, Korea & Japan, Quanzhou)
6. West Africa, 900-1400 (Ghana, Mali)
7. Americas, 300 to 1490 (Maya, Aztec, Inca)
8. Sites of Encounter in Medieval World, 1200-1490 (Mongols, Majorca, Calicut)
9. Global Convergence, 1450-1750 (Voyages, Columbian Exchange, Trade Networks, Gunpowder Empires; Colonialism in Americas & Southeast Asia, Atlantic World)
10. Impact of Ideas, 1500-1750 (Spread of Religions; Reformation; Renaissance, Scientific Revolution, Enlightenment)

The World in 300 CE
How interconnected were the distant regions of the world in 300 CE?
This unit serves an introduction to world regions and interconnections as of the year 300 CE. The teacher explains that a central question of the seventh grade world history course is: How did the distant regions of the world become more interconnected through medieval and early modern times? In this unit, they will study the interconnections of world cultures in 300 CE. The world’s people were fundamentally divided into two regions: Afroeurasia or the Eastern Hemisphere, and the Americas, or the Western Hemisphere. In the Americas, there were many different cultures. In two areas, Mesoamerica and the area along the Andean mountain spine, there were states and empires with large cities supported by advanced agricultural techniques and widespread regional trade. In 300 CE, the Maya were building a powerful culture of city-states, and Teotihuacán in central Mexico was one of the largest cities in the world. These two centers traded with each other. In the Andes region, the state of Tiahuanaco extended its trade networks from modern-day Peru to Chile. While these two regions were probably not in contact with each other, trade routes crossed much of North and South America.
Within Afroeurasia, there were many distinct cultures that spoke their own languages, followed distinct customs, and had little contact with other cultures. However, across the center of Afroeurasia, many cultures were connected by trade routes. These trade routes were across land, such as the Silk Road between Central Asia and China, and across seas, such as the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. Luxury goods, such as silk from China or frankincense from the Horn of Africa, traveled from merchant to merchant across Afroeurasia from the Atlantic to Pacific Coasts, but the merchants themselves did not travel that far. A small group of elite people (wealthy, land-owning, ruling, noble, religious leaders) in each of those cultures bought imported luxury products. Besides trade goods, travelers on the trade routes carried ideas and technologies from one culture to other cultures. Missionaries of Buddhism and Christianity spread their religious ideas. In 300 CE, the regions of Afroeurasia were much more connected to each other than ever before. However, they were not as connected and intertwined as they are today. In 300 CE, the most important influences in each culture came from within that culture, rather than from contacts with the outside world.
Although there were hundreds of different cultures in Afroeurasia, there were four empires, states, and cultures that dominated the center of Afroeurasia. These were the Roman Empire (Mediterranean Region and Europe), the Sasanian Persian Empire (Southwestern Asia), Gupta Empire (South Asia), and China (East Asia). Students analyze maps that show these empires across Afroeurasia and trace the trade routes (on land and sea) that connected them.
Migrations continued to be important change factors. Along the northern edge of the agricultural regions of China, India, Persia and Rome, in the steppe grasslands, pastoral nomad societies moved east and west. Some formed mounted warrior armies which attacked the empires of China, India, Persia, and Rome and disrupted commerce on the silk roads and land trade routes across Eurasia. In Oceania, Polynesian explorers used outrigger canoes and navigational expertise to expand their settlement to new islands across the Pacific. In Sub-Saharan Africa, Bantu-speaking farmers were expanding southward and founding communities, mixing with or displacing older cattle-herding and foraging populations and expanding town and trade networks.
Between 300 and 600 CE, the disruptions caused by the migrations and attacks and the decline of some empires (such as Han China, Parthian Persia, and the Western Roman Empire), made these turbulent times for many peoples of the world. The number of big cities declined from an estimated 75 in 100 CE to only 47 by 500 CE. But in other areas of the world, the networks of trade and interconnection expanded. As trade across the Sahara increased, Ghana emerged as a new commercial kingdom along the southern edge of the desert. The routes expanded southward to Aksum in East Africa, which flourished as a center of Indian Ocean trade. In the seventh century, a dynamic period of trade and cultural interchange took hold across Afroeurasia. Trade and the spread of religious ideas between societies in Afroeurasia increased again.

Rome and Christendom, 300 to 1200
How did the environment and technological innovations affect the growth and contraction of the Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, and Medieval Christendom? What impact did human expansion have on the environment?
How was Rome a site of encounter?
How did the Roman Empire gain and maintain power over people and territories?
Did the Roman Empire fall?
How did the religion of Christianity develop and change over time? How did Christianity spread through the empire and to other cultures?
How did the decentralized system of feudalism control people but weaken state power?
This unit builds on the sixth-grade study of Roman civilization. Even if students did not study the Roman Republic in sixth grade, the seventh-grade teacher should not spend time reviewing that phase of Roman history. Instead the teacher should begin with the question: How did the environment and technological innovations affect the growth and contraction of the Roman Empire? Rome began on the Italian peninsula and spread around the Mediterranean Sea. At its greatest extent, the empire stretched from Britain to Egypt and from the Atlantic to Iraq. It united the entire Mediterranean region for the first (and only) time. Although the Romans did conquer northwestern Europe, they were more at home in the warm, dry climate around the Mediterranean Sea. Geographically, northern Europe lies within the temperate climatic zone that in ancient and early medieval times was heavily forested. Atlantic westerly winds bring high rainfall, mostly in winter, to ocean-facing Europe. Deeper into Eurasia, however, these latitudes become drier and colder. In Mediterranean Europe, mild, rainy winters and hot, dry summers prevail. Beginning in ancient times, farmers converted forests of southern Europe into wheat fields, olive orchards, and vineyards. Farming advanced more slowly in the dense woodlands and marshes of the north. The California EEI lesson, “Managing Nature’s Bounty,” has a map of the physical features and natural regions of Europe and lesson 4 explores the products of different European regions. Students analyze what effect geographic location had on the Roman Empire and on the Germanic peoples who lived in the northern forests beyond the Danube and Rhine rivers. Students map the extent of the empire and label the most important provinces (Egypt, Spain, Gaul, Greece, Syria, Palestine) and bodies of water. They also examine Roman buildings and roads to see the application of the two most important Roman technological innovations: the arch and cement. Studying maps of roads, trade routes, and products traded within the empire shows that the Roman Empire was based on a network of cities. Those cities were dependent on trade with other regions of the empire. This is common today, but in the ancient world, it was not.
The teacher does not review the Roman Republic, but begins with the Roman Empire at its height, with the question: How was Rome a site of encounter? A site of encounter is a place where people of different cultures meet and exchange products, ideas, and technologies. At the site of encounter, new products, ideas, and technologies are often created because of the exchange. Rome was a multicultural empire. Romans spoke Latin, but they conquered Egyptians, Greeks, Syrians, Jews, Celts and Gauls, people who spoke Greek, Aramaic, and hundreds of other languages, and followed dozens of religions. Roman emperors built up the city of Rome to bring together the best from their empire and the world. Through studying Rome as a site of encounter, students explore the character and contributions of Roman civilization at its height. Residents benefited from sophisticated art, architecture, and engineering. For example, the Romans constructed huge aqueducts to bring water to cities from many miles away. Imports of grain and olive oil fed the city of between one and two million people at its height. The city featured a Colosseum for gladiatorial contests, a race track, theaters, baths (for both bathing and socializing), and elegant forums with markets and law courts. Many great thinkers and writers, such as the Pliny the Elder, Juvenal, Plutarch, and Virgil (or Vergil), lived and wrote during the Roman Peace (Pax Romana), the two centuries of prosperity that began with the reign of Augustus Caesar (27 BCE-14 CE). However, this prosperity was based on riches from conquest and slave labor on large agricultural estates that provided food and luxuries for the cities. Wealthy Romans also purchased luxuries, such as silk from China, medicines and jewels from India, and animals from sub-Saharan Africa, brought into the empire by merchants on the Silk Road and other Afroeurasian trade routes.
Next students examine the question: How did the Roman Empire gain and maintain power over people and territories? After Augustus, Rome was ruled by an emperor who theoretically had total power. However, in practice, the power of the emperor was limited by the lack of an effective administration, except in the military. The Roman legions were the source of imperial authority. For civilian government, the empire relied on attracting local elites (landowners, wealthy and/or powerful people, religious leaders) to become local administrators. Corruption was a huge problem, and military leaders had too much power. However, the unity of Rome and the power of its culture gave many people a strong reason to support the empire. Roman citizenship was initially given to people from the provinces as a reward for service, for example, to retired auxiliary soldiers. They and their sons then had the right to vote. Gradually, everyone in the provinces gained citizenship, except for slaves. Broadening citizenship was a deliberate policy of certain emperors, who believed it would cause more people to support the empire and help it run smoothly. Roman laws also helped solidify the empire. A body of laws was passed down through the centuries and ultimately influenced legal systems in modern states such as France, Italy, and Spain, as well as Latin American countries.
Grade Seven Classroom Example: The Roman Empire
To understand the Roman perspective on the empire’s power over other people and territories, students do a close reading of an excerpt from Vergil’s Aeneid (Book VI, lines 845-853). Mr. Taylor gives students a copy of the excerpt with the guiding question: What did the poet Vergil think about the Roman Empire’s power over people and territories? The handout also has a sentence deconstruction chart for the excerpt and a source analysis template.
For the first reading, the students read the excerpt to themselves and then discuss these questions: Did Vergil think Roman power was good or bad for the conquered people? What words support your answer? For the second reading, Mr. Taylor guides the students through a sentence deconstruction chart, pointing out the parallel phrases describing the “others” (the Greeks and Persians) and “you” (the Romans). The students also complete the source analysis template, with information from the textbook or teacher notes. They learn that Vergil was a Roman poet in the first century BCE. His patron was Augustus Caesar, the founder of the Roman Empire.
The historical context for the writing of the Aeneid was the beginning of the Roman Empire. In fact, Vergil wrote this poem to glorify the new empire and Augustus as its leader. For the third reading, Mr. Taylor divides the students up into pairs. Each pair marks up the text with cognitive markers and annotates it in the margins. He then displays several of the pairs’ annotated texts on the elmo, explains difficult points, and answers questions. For the fourth reading, students answer text-dependent questions. For the final question, Mr. Taylor calls for an interpretation to answer the focus question.
CA HSS Standards: 7.1.1
CA HSS Analysis Skills (6–8): Research, Evidence, and Point of View 5, Historical Interpretation 1
CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.6–8.1, 2, 6, SL.7.1, L5a
CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.7.1, 6a

In the late second century, the Romans came up against limits. Roman armies could not defeat the Persian Empire in the east, and there was little reason to expand into the rural communities and forests of northeastern Europe. Deprived of its income from conquest, Rome still had to defend its frontier on the Rhine and Danube rivers from the Germanic peoples and its border with the Persian Sasanian Empire in the east. In the third century, the emperors Diocletian and Constantine separated the Roman Empire into two halves and reformed the empire to focus its resources on military defense. Constantine established a new capital for the Eastern Roman Empire at Byzantium, which he renamed Constantinople.
At this point, the teacher shifts to the development of Christianity. In the early years of the Roman Empire, Christianity began as a sect of Judaism in Palestine, a province of the Roman Empire. The teacher focuses on the question: How did the religion of Christianity develop and change over time? How did Christianity spread through the empire and to other cultures? According to the New Testament of the Christian Bible, Jesus, a Jewish carpenter from the small Judean city of Nazareth, began to preach a message of peace and divine salvation through love. He taught that God loved all his creation, regardless of status or circumstance, and that humans should reflect that love in relations with one another. Jesus confirmed the Jewish belief in one God, but he added the promise of eternal salvation to believers. The Roman authorities in Judea executed Jesus. But under the leadership of his early followers, notably Paul, a Jewish scholar from Anatolia, Christians took advantage of Roman roads and sea lanes to travel widely, preaching to both Jews and others. As missionaries spread Christianity beyond the Jewish community, they abandoned some Jewish customs, such as dietary laws, to make the new religion more accessible to non-Jews. Christian communities multiplied around the Mediterranean, through Persia, and into Central Asia. The church communities welcomed new converts without consideration of their political or social standing, including the urban poor and women. Upper class and influential Romans who converted appear to have been predominantly women, and some of them assumed leadership positions. Many Jews did not convert to Christianity, and Judaism and Christianity split into two separate religions.
The Romans had an official state religion (Jupiter, Juno, deified former emperors) but they allowed people they had conquered to follow other religions. However, after some Jews rebelled against Roman rule, the Romans exiled many Jews from Palestine, which led to the diaspora, or spreading out, of Jewish communities across Afroeurasia. Christians also got into trouble with Roman authorities because Christians refused to attend the official sacrifices to the Roman gods. The Roman authorities sometimes persecuted Christians and executed them, but at other times, Christians were left alone.
In the fourth century CE, Emperor Constantine legalized the religion of Christianity, and soon after, it became Rome’s state religion. Constantine wanted the Christian Church to unify and support the now divided Roman Empire. As it became a state religion, Christianity changed. The bishops who had been leaders of semi-secret, persecuted communities were now charged with supporting the Roman Empire. Constantine insisted that the bishops hold a council at Nicaea and agree on one set of Christian beliefs, summarized in the Nicene Creed. Church leaders selected certain texts (gospels and letters) for the official Christian Bible, which was translated into Latin. They organized the Christian Church with a Roman structure and gave their support to Roman authorities. Church leaders then vigorously tried to convert everyone to Christianity. As the Western Roman Empire shrank, Christian bishops often took over administration and defense of Roman cities.
The teacher points out that all religions change over time. In the historical context of 203 CE, when Christians were sometimes persecuted by the Romans, martyrs were very admired and made into saints of the early church. When Christianity became the official religion of the Roman Empire, the religion changed again, and the new emphasis was on obeying Roman authorities, behaving well, and converting non-believers to Christianity. The teacher concludes by telling students that they will return to this question about the development and changes in Christianity later in the unit.
Teachers now introduce students to the question: Did the Roman Empire fall? In 476 CE, the empire in the west disappeared, though the eastern half continued to thrive. As the Byzantine Empire, this Greek-speaking Roman state survived until 1453. Students examine the evidence (from the textbook or teacher notes) and form their own interpretations to answer the lesson question. They examine factors that might have contributed to the collapse of western Rome: declining financial resources, political corruption and insubordinate military groups, excessive reliance on slave labor, depopulation from epidemics, and worsening frontier assaults, as the Huns migrated westward and pushed waves of Germanic tribes into the empire. By the time the Western Roman Empire ended in 476 CE, it had already shrunk into a small area, a shadow of its former extent. The teacher may point out that mounted warrior armies from Central Eurasia caused problems for China, India, and Persia as well, and contributed to a decline of trade on the silk roads and other land routes across Eurasia between 300 and 600 CE. The teacher has students meet together in groups to discuss the question and use their notes to make a T-chart of the reasons and evidence that support the “fall” of Rome, and the reasons and evidence that contradict the “fall” of Rome. Then the groups evaluate the reasons and evidence and formulate a one-sentence interpretation answering the question: Did the Roman Empire fall? The teacher also explains that if they argue that Rome did not fall, they should choose another word to characterize the end of the Western Roman Empire and the transition to the Byzantine Empire in the east. After student groups prepare their T-charts and write their interpretations, a student volunteer from each group writes the group’s interpretation on the board. Groups share their reasons and evidence for and against, as the teacher records it on a T-chart on the board. Then the teacher and students review and discuss each of the interpretations. The teacher instructs student groups to review and revise their interpretations if necessary and identify the two pieces of evidence that best support their interpretation. The teacher explains that evidence must be specific. After students have selected the evidence in groups, each student writes a paragraph answering the question: Did the Roman Empire fall? They must include the two pieces of evidence. To support English Learners, the teacher provides a paragraph frame that starts each sentence with appropriate academic historical language.
Next students study the Byzantine Empire, with the question: How did the environment and contact with other cultures affect the growth and contraction of the Byzantine Empire? The Eastern Roman Empire was stronger than the Western portion. It had more people, more cities, greater manufacturing and commerce, more tax revenues, and more effective defenses against mounted warrior attacks from the north. Its military strength and wealth from the Afroeurasian luxury trade caused a flowering culture in the period between 600 and 1000 CE. The Byzantine Empire, as the eastern lands became known, had strong historical connections to earlier Hellenistic civilization. Its language was Greek, not Latin. This state was highly centralized around its capital of Constantinople and the rule of the emperor and his officials. The Christian church in the Byzantine Empire was closely connected to the emperor and his administration.
The Byzantine Empire continued the Roman Empire’s conflicts with the Persians along the eastern frontier. This long conflict weakened both empires and left them vulnerable when Muslim armies attacked in the mid-seventh century. While Muslim Arabs conquered the Sasanid Empire, the Byzantine Empire survived, but lost huge territories in North Africa and western Asia. The Byzantine Empire shrank but it did not fall until 1453.
In the fourth and fifth centuries, the Western Roman Empire fragmented, causing population to fall, cities to shrink, and agriculture to contract. As the empire shrank, Germanic armies and migrants overran Europe, dividing the region into small rudimentary kingdoms. The teacher begins to prepare students for the question: How did the decentralized system of feudalism control people but weaken state power? The teacher points out that early medieval kingdoms did not have strong authority. Local leaders and landholders were much more effective rulers of their small territories. In the Middle Ages, all power was local, not centralized in a state. Over the next few centuries, there was little trade, and most cities disappeared. In the eighth century, a Muslim dynasty founded a strong state in Iberia. Charlemagne (768-814), was an exceptionally strong Christian king, who temporarily united a large part of Europe in the late eighth century and contributed much to the advancement of Latin literacy, learning, and the arts. Students may read excerpts from Einhard’s Life of Charlemagne to analyze the factors that made Charlemagne’s rule so successful.
After Charlemagne, political order was again fragmented by Viking, Magyar, and Muslim invasions. Local power, established in parts of Western Christendom through feudal relations, was the key to defeating the invaders. In feudalism, kings and powerful regional rulers offered protection and farm estates, or manors, to less powerful knights in return for loyalty and military service. The manors provided the income needed for a knight’s horses, armor, and training. Knights, as lords of the manors, also controlled the serfs, peasants who were tied permanently to manor and obligated to give their lord labor and crops in return for security. Knights, regional lords, and aristocrats gained rights to hand down fiefs to heirs. Mothers and prospective wives often exerted great influence over marriages and family alliances. Gradually the elite mounted warriors began to be known as nobles.
These nobles wanted to keep control over local areas rather than to give power to the king and central government. Students learn about the conflict between King John and the great nobles in England, who forced the king to grant the Magna Carta. This document guaranteed trial by jury of one’s peers and the concept of no taxation without representation. From this root, other medieval developments in England, such as common law and Parliament, gradually limited the king’s power and laid the foundations of English constitutional monarchy. 
In addition to considering the political aspects of feudalism, students look at these questions: How did the environment and technological innovations affect the growth of Medieval Christendom? What impact did human expansion have on the environment? In the tenth century, serfs and free peasants employed new technologies, such as the moldboard plow and the horse collar, to cultivate new farmland and boost agricultural production. Around 1000 CE, these innovations caused an agricultural revolution in Western Christendom, which caused the population to increase, trade to expand, and cities to grow again. In this expansion, many of the forests of northern Europe were cut down, as humans used wood for heating and cooking and cleared land for farming. Lessons 2 and 3 of the California EEI unit, “Managing Nature’s Bounty: Feudalism in Medieval Europe,” analyze how feudal relations and the manor system allocated ecosystem resources, and how physical geography influenced feudal administrative positions and resource management. 
As students return to study of Christianity, they return to the question: How did the religion of Christianity develop and change over time? First, they trace on a map the spread of Christianity across Europe and Afroeurasia (as far east as Central Asia). In the Middle Ages, people called the Christian parts of Europe “Christendom,” which shows that an important part of their identity was being Christian. Since kings and states were so weak, the Church, whose hierarchy of clerics extended from the Pope down to the village priest, became the largest, most integrated organization in Europe. The Church followed a hierarchy adopted from the Roman Empire. Missionaries spread out to convert Germanic and Slavic people to Christianity. Christianity spread in Central and Eastern Europe, facilitating formation of states such as Poland in 966. Although most of the conversions were voluntary, some Christian kings forced people to convert to Christianity, as Charlemagne did to the Saxons in early 800s. Wealthy Christians donated land to monasteries, filled with monks and nuns who pledged themselves to live separately from the world. These monks and nuns were the only educated people, and they devoted themselves to copying Roman and Christian texts. Around 900, popes began to assert their control over the church hierarchy, which brought them into conflict with secular monarchs. Students learn about the split between the Orthodox Church, which acknowledged the leadership of the patriarch of Constantinople, and the Catholic Church, which recognized the authority of the pope in Rome. Churches in Eastern Europe (Russian, Greek, Serbian) followed the Orthodox or Greek Church, since missionaries led by Constantinople had converted their people to Christianity. Because missionaries led by Rome had converted people in Western, Central and Northern Europe, these remained in “the Church,” also called the Latin Church and, later, the Roman Catholic Church.

Southwestern Asia, 300-1200: Persia and the World of Islam 
How did the environment affect the development and expansion of the Persian Empire, Muslim empires, and cities? What impact did this expansion have on the environment?
How did Islam develop and change over time? How did Islam spread to multiple cultures?
What were the multiple ways people of different cultures interacted at the sites of encounter, such as Baghdad?
Why was Norman Sicily a site of encounter?
What were the effects of the exchanges at Cairo?
How did the Muslim empires and institutions help different regions of Afroeurasia become more interconnected?
This unit examines the geography of Southwestern Asia (including the Middle East), the Persian Sasanian Empire, the emergence and development of Islam, the Umayyad and Abbasid Caliphates, and the spread of Islam, and interactions at three sites of encounter, Baghdad in the eighth century, Sicily in the twelfth century, and Cairo in the fourteenth century. The teacher begins with introducing the question: How did the environment affect the development and expansion of the Persian Empire, Muslim empires, and cities? What impact did this expansion have on the environment? A climatic map of Southwestern Asia shows that much of this area falls within a long belt of dry country that extends from the Sahara Desert to the arid lands of northern China. In lesson one of the California EEI unit, “Arabic Trade Networks,” students examine the physical features and natural systems of the Arabian Peninsula and the human improvements to farming practices which increased supplies of food. Across this dry zone, including Arabia, pastoral nomads herded camels and other animals, and oasis cities sheltered farmers, artisans, and merchants. North of the Arabian peninsula is the lush agricultural land of Mesopotamia and Persia. Here settled farmers had supported an advanced civilization going back to ancient Mesopotamia. A map of the eastern hemisphere also shows students that Southwestern Asia, Persia, Arabia, the Red Sea, and the Persian (Arabian) Gulf were natural channels for land and sea trade in spices, textiles, and many other goods between the Indian Ocean world and the Mediterranean area. These geographical factors put Southwestern Asia and Arab, Persian, and Indian merchants and sailors at the center of the Afroeurasian trade networks, which began to grow dynamically after the seventh century.
The teacher turns briefly to the Persian Sasanian Empire from 300 to 651, when it was conquered by Muslim armies. The teacher reminds students that the Persian Empire (under different names, which aren’t important for the students to memorize) had existed from about 550 BCE and was the heir to the ancient civilization of Mesopotamia. It was the most important state in Southwestern Asia and Rome and the Byzantine Empire’s great rival for power in the eastern Mediterranean and western Asia. In the sixth century, the Sasanians ruled an empire that began at the Euphrates River and covered modern Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, and parts of central Asia. Their ruler was called by the title “King of Kings.” The official religion of Persia was Zoroastrianism, but they practiced religious toleration. Many Jews and Christians lived in the Persian Empire. Every land trade route across central Eurasia passed through the Persian Empire, and the tax income from the trade made the Persians wealthy. Continued warfare against the Byzantine Empire weakened the Sasanian Persian Empire in the mid-seventh century and contributed to its fall to Muslim armies.
The students now turn to the emergence of the religion of Islam, as they study the question: How did Islam develop and change over time? How did Islam spread to multiple cultures? Along with Judaism and Christianity, Islam is an “Abrahamic” religion, that is, a faith built on the ancient monotheism of Abraham. Beginning in 610, Muhammad (570-632 CE), a resident of the small Arabian city of Mecca, preached a new vision of monotheistic faith. According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad, an Arabic-speaking merchant, received revelations from God, which were written down in the Qur’an. This message declared that human beings must worship and live by the teachings of the one God and treat one another with equality and justice. Divine salvation will come to the righteous, but those who deny God, “Allah” in Arabic, will suffer damnation. God’s commandments require all men and women to live virtuously by submitting to Allah and following the Five Pillars. Like Christianity and unlike Judaism, there is an afterlife in Islam; faithful believers are promised paradise after death. Islamic teachings are set forth principally in the Qur’an and the Hadith, the sayings and actions of Muhammad. These were the foundation for the Shariah, the religious laws governing moral, social, and economic life. Islamic law, for example, rejected the older Arabian view of women as “family property,” declaring that all women and men are entitled to respect and moral self-governance, even though Muslim society, like all agrarian societies of that era, remained patriarchal, that is, dominated politically, socially, and culturally by men.
Muhammad also founded a political state in order to defend the young Muslim community. He led armies of desert tribes to take over all of the Arabian peninsula. After his death, the leaders of the Muslim community chose one of his followers to be their new leader, with the title “caliph.” The caliphs sent armies northward to conquer part of the Christian Byzantine Empire and all of the Persian Sasanian Empire. As the Muslim conquests multiplied, the Umayyad dynasty of caliphs ruled an empire called the Umayyad Caliphate. Muslim armies continued to conquer land until by 750 CE, the Umayyad Caliphate extended from Spain to northern India. Muslims did not force Christians or Jews, “people of the book,” to convert, but people of other religions were sometimes forced to convert. Non-Muslims had to pay a special tax to the caliphate. Gradually more and more people in the caliphate converted to Islam, and Arabic, the language of both the conquerors and the Qur’an, achieved gradual dominance across much of Southwestern Asia (except in Persia) and North Africa. The Umayyad caliphate broke into several states after 750, but most of the Middle East remained unified under the caliphs of the Abbasid dynasty (751-1258) with its capital in Baghdad.
The teacher introduces the new capital of Baghdad as the next site of encounter, with the question: What were the multiple ways people of different cultures interacted at sites of encounter, such as Baghdad? The teacher asks students to think about what they have just studied about the spread of the Muslim Empire as one way people of different cultures interact. That is, Arabs, who were nomadic tribesmen from Arabia, converted to a new religion, and inspired by that religion, fought wars against other cultures. One type of cultural interaction is war. After the conquest, people of other cultures had to live under Umayyad Muslim rule and pay special taxes if they belonged to another religion. This type of cultural interaction is called coexistence in communities. Another type is adoption and adaptation. Some of these conquered people adopted the new religion for various reasons, such as religious conversion, access to political power, and socio-economic advantages. As they converted, they changed their names, their social identity, and associated with Muslims in their area, rather than with their home group of Jews, Christians, or others. Over time, they adopted more of Arab culture as well. However, as they adopted the Muslim religion and Arab culture, they also adapted religious and cultural practices to accommodate local customs. For example, the custom of secluding elite women inside a special part of the house and only allowing them to go out when their hair and most of their bodies were covered predates the religion of Islam. It was actually a Persian and Mediterranean (and ancient Athenian) custom. Before Islam, Arabian women were not confined to the household. The Persians and Mediterranean people who converted to Islam adapted social practices to include their custom. This is just one example of the cultural adaptation process.
Under the Abbasids, Baghdad grew from an insignificant village to one of the leading cities of the world. The city’s culture was a mix of Arab, Persian, Indian, Turkish, and Central Asian culture. The Abbasids encouraged the growth of learning and borrowing from Greek, Hellenistic, and Indian science and medicine. They built schools and libraries, translated and preserved Greek philosophic, scientific, and medical texts, and supported scientists who expanded that knowledge. In Baghdad and other Muslim-ruled cities, Muslim, Christian, and Jewish scholars collaborated to study ancient Greek, Persian, and Indian writings, forging and widely disseminating a more advanced synthesis of philosophical, scientific, mathematical, geographic, artistic, medical, and literary knowledge. To investigate the question: What did the interaction of Arab, Persian, Greek, Hellenistic, and Indian ideas and technologies at Baghdad (and the Abbasid caliphate) produce? students analyze visuals of libraries, schools, and scientific drawings from Muslim manuscripts, the circulation of “Arabic” numerals, and words of Arabic origin (such as algebra, candy, mattress, rice). The teacher sets up a gallery walk and provides student groups with a source analysis template. The template asks students to record source information, describe the contents of the visual, and cite evidence from the visual that answers the lesson question. Students share some of their observations and answers to the whole class, as the teacher lists the products on the board. Then the teacher guides students through developing a one-sentence interpretation that answers the question. The students then return to their groups to discuss the evidence they have gathered. The teacher stresses that they should choose the best two pieces of evidence from their gallery walk. The group chooses two pieces of evidence and each group member completes an evidence analysis chart (with columns for evidence, meaning, significance, and source). The teacher displays several group charts on the elmo, clears up any misconceptions, and showcases examples of good evidence choices, analyses, and citations.
After 900, the Abbasid Empire began to fragment into many smaller states. However, the common knowledge of Arabic, the pilgrimage to Mecca, and extensive trade and travel unified the Muslim world. Islam continued to spread, sometimes by conquest, but also by the missionary work of Sufis and traveling Muslim merchants. Sufi saints and teachers combined local and Islamic traditions, and inspired common people on the frontier areas of the Muslim world – east Africa, Southeast Asia, and India – to convert.
The History Blueprint is a free curriculum developed by the California History-Social Science Project (http://chssp.ucdavis.edu), designed to increase student literacy and understanding of history. Three units are available for free download from the CHSSP’s website, including Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World, a comprehensive standards-aligned unit for seventh-grade teachers that combines carefully selected and excerpted primary sources, original content, and substantive support for student literacy development. For more information or to download the curriculum, visit: http://chssp.ucdavis.edu/programs/historyblueprint.

The teacher now tells students that they are going to look at Western Christendom and the World of Islam together through studying the site of encounter in twelfth-century Norman Sicily, using the History Blueprint’s Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World unit, starting with the question: Why was Norman Sicily a site of encounter? Because of its geographical location, multicultural population and tolerant rulers, the Norman kingdom of Sicily was a major site of exchange among Muslims, Jews, Latin Roman Christians, and Greek Byzantine Christians in the twelfth century. At the same time, Latin Christian crusaders were battling with Syrian, Arab, Egyptian, and North African Muslim warriors over territory and religious differences. Whereas in the past historians placed emphasis on religious differences and the Crusades, historians now emphasize the common features of these Mediterranean cultures and the many ways in which Christians, Muslims, and Jews interacted. The Sicily lesson reflects this new world history approach to the medieval Mediterranean. Rather than directly teaching one interpretation, the teacher presents the primary sources, guides students through analyzing them and gathering evidence, and asks students to form their own interpretation to answer the question: Was there more trade (with peace and tolerance) or conflict (especially conflict between religious groups)? Students investigate Al-Idrisi’s world map, excerpts from Geoffrey Malaterra and Ibn Jubayr, documents from the Cairo Geniza and the Venetian archives, lists of trade goods, and visuals of objects created and sold in Sicily through map activities, close readings, a gallery walk, and discussion. Students analyze the content of the lesson in a graphic organizer that also introduces them to the concept of cause-and-effect historical reasoning.
The central position of Islamic world in Afroeurasia became increasingly important as trade and exchange expanded. Muslim merchants, scholars and Sufis traveled between the great cities, such as Córdoba, Damascus and Cairo, which produced luxury goods such as steel swords and embroidered silk capes. Students investigate the question: How did the Muslim empires and institutions help different regions of Afroeurasia become more interconnected? through the second site of encounter in the History Blueprint lesson, Cairo in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Cairo was at the center of the network of roads, sea routes, and cities that supported trade and pilgrimage in the Islamic world, making it one of the most important trade cities in Afroeurasia. Students work with the Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World interactive map either online or through the teacher’s projection to make an interpretation about the question: Looking at its geographic position, what advantages did Cairo have as a trade city? Either individually or in pairs, students read a secondary informative text, “Cairo Background Reading,” answer text-dependent questions, and, in a group, summarize the main ideas of the text in a cause-and-effect graphic organizer around the question: What were the effects of the exchanges at Cairo? The Islamic world was a network of cities that was tied together by common religion, pilgrimage, trade, and intellectual culture. Islamic institutions, such as the pilgrimage (or hajj), caravans, caravanserais, funduqs, souqs, and madrassas, and favorable policies of city and state governments provided major assistance to merchants and travelers. In a gallery walk of primary-source visuals of and text excerpts about these institutions, students gather and analyze evidence using an evidence analysis chart. The same routes also transmitted technologies and food plants. For example, paper-making technology reached the Southwestern Asia from China around the eighth century and spread from there to Europe in the following 300 years. Food plants, including sugar cane, oranges, melons, eggplants, and spinach, were diffused widely along the exchange routes. Lesson three of the California EEI unit, “Arabic Trade Networks,” helps students analyze the circulation of regional products throughout Afroeurasia. Less positive things also spread along trade routes, such as the bubonic plague. The Black Death of the 1300s killed millions in China and caused the population of Europe and the Muslim world to plummet temporarily by about a third. In the Cairo lesson, students read primary sources from Ibn Battuta, Agnolo di Tura, and al-Maqrizi describing the impact of the Black Death of 1348-1350 in Europe and the Muslim world.
Using the information from the lesson sources, graphic organizers and evidence analysis charts, students write an argumentative paragraph on the question: Which of the effects of the exchanges at Cairo do you think was the most important? They make a claim, state their reasons, and support the reasons with evidence from the primary sources. The “Effects Paragraph” assignment has sentence starters for the claim and reasons and an evidence analysis chart that helps student paraphrase, analyze, and cite evidence. For English Learners, there are also sentence frames with appropriate academic and disciplinary language to paraphrase, analyze, and cite the two pieces of evidence. After providing feedback to students on their claims, reasons, and use and analysis of evidence, the teacher concludes by telling students that they will be returning to the Islamic trade and pilgrimage network in future units. Muslim merchants eventually traded from China to the Mediterranean, and Jewish merchants also traded freely in the Muslim world. They established communities across Afroeurasia that were connected by family ties and trade connections.

South Asia, 300 to 1200
Under the Gupta Empire, how did the environment, cultural and religious changes, and technological innovations affect the people of India?
How did Indian monks, nuns, merchants, travelers, and states spread religious ideas and practices and cultural styles of art and architecture to Central and Southeast Asia?
How did the religions of Hinduism and Buddhism spread and change over time?
The Gupta monarchs reunified much of the subcontinent in the third century CE, ushering in the Classical Age of India. As they study the question: Under the Gupta Empire, how did the environment, cultural and religious changes, and technological innovations affect the people of India? students learn that the Gupta dynasty (280-550 CE) presided over a rich period of religious, socio-economic, educational, literary, and scientific development, including the base-ten numerical system and the concept of zero. Travel and internal colonization by settlers from northern into southern India helped produce a common Indic culture that unified the people of the subcontinent. Buddhist monasteries and Hindu temples and schools spread. Sanskrit became the principal literary language throughout India. Enduring contributions of ancient Indian civilization to other areas of Afroeurasia include the cotton textile industry, the technology of crystalizing sugar, astronomical treatises, the practice of monasticism, the game of chess, and the art, architecture, and performing arts of the Classical Age. Students analyze maps of the extent of the Gupta Empire and visuals of its achievements in science, math, art, architecture, and Sanskrit literature. After the fall of the Gupta Empire, India had many states. The Chola Empire ruled over much of southern India and established maritime commercial trading networks throughout much of the Indian Ocean. The Chola are associated with significant artistic achievement that included the building of monumental Hindu temples and the creation of remarkable sculptures and bronzes.
Building on their previous study of Hinduism in 6th grade, students study the question: How did Hinduism change over time? Hinduism continued to evolve with the Bhakti movement, which emphasized personal expression of devotion to God, who had three aspects: Brahma, the creator, Vishnu, the keeper, and Siva, the destroyer. The Bhakti movement placed emphasis on social and religious equality and a personal expression of devotion to God in the popular, vernacular languages. People of all social groups now had personal access to their own personal deities, whom they could worship with songs, dances, processions, and temple visits. Bhakti grew more popular, thanks to the saints such as Meera Bai and Ramananda. Even though India was not unified into one state, nor did its people belong to a single religion, the entire area was developing a cultural unity.
Students next examine this question: How did Indian monks, nuns, merchants, travelers, and states spread religious ideas and practices and cultural styles of art and architecture to Central and Southeast Asia? During and after the Gupta Empire, trade connections between India and Southeast Asia facilitated the spread of Hindu and Buddhist ideas to Srivijaya, a large trading empire after 600, Java, and the Khmer Empire. In the Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World Lesson 6: Calicut, the “Indian and Southeast Asian Art” activity has students compare art and architecture from India and Southeast Asia. When students have compiled their evidence, the teacher asks them why they think Southeast Asian rulers would adopt religious ideas and artistic styles from Indian kingdoms. After they share their interpretations, the teacher points out that pre-modern rulers displayed their power through temples and that the architectural similarities among the temples are evidence of a shared culture of rulership in the region. In addition to personal religious motives, Southeast Asian kings could build up their prestige and legitimacy by adopting the cultural, religious, and artistic styles of the powerful and prestigious Indian kingdoms and empires.
Next students examine the question: How did Buddhism spread and change over time? Buddhist missionaries and travelers carried Buddhism from India to Central Asia and then to China, as well as to Southeast Asia, during this period as well. At the same time, Christian and Muslim missionaries were also spreading their universal religions. As it moved outside of India and became a universal religion, Buddhism changed. In 600 BCE, Buddha was sage, a wise man; but by 300 CE, his followers were worshipping the Buddha as a god. Nirvana changed from “nothingness” or “extinction” to a kind of heaven for believers in the afterlife. Mahayana Buddhists also added the idea that there were bodhisattvas, divine souls who delayed entering nirvana to help others on earth. Either here, or in the China unit, students trace the journey of Xuanzang, who departed from China in 627 CE on pilgrimage to Buddhist holy sites in India. He returned home with 527 boxes of Buddhist texts, which he devoted the rest of his life to translating. The building of monasteries along the Silk Road, at Dunhuang, Yungang and Bamiyan, helped transmit texts, people, and religious ideas through Central to East Asia.
After 1000, Turks from Central Asia, who were recent converts to Islam, began to conquer states in northwestern India. Sometimes Turkish Muslim leaders forced Hindus to convert, but at other times rulers practiced religious toleration. The most powerful of these states was the Delhi Sultanate. Islam became firmly established politically in the north as well as in some coastal towns and parts of the Deccan Plateau, although the majority of the population of South Asia remained Hindu. There were continuous close trade relations and intellectual connections between India and the Islamic World. As a concrete example of cultural transmission, students may trace the Gupta advances in astronomy and mathematics (particularly the numeral system which included a place value of ten) to the work of al-Khwarizmi, a Persian mathematician of the ninth century, who applied the base-ten numerical system pioneered in India to the study of algebra, a word derived from the Arabic al-jabr, meaning “restoration.” As trade grew along the sea-routes of the Indian Ocean, India became a major producer of cotton cloth, spices, and other commodities with a volume of exports second only to China.

East Asia, 300-1300: China and Japan
How did the Tang and Song dynasties gain and maintain power over people and territories?
How did the environmental conditions and technological innovations cause the medieval economic revolution? What were the effects of this revolution?
Why was Quanzhou such an important site of encounter?
How did Chinese culture, ideas, and technologies and Buddhism influence Korea and Japan?
What influence did samurai customs and values have on the government and society of medieval Japan?
From 300 to 1300 CE, China had a larger population and economy than any other major region of the world. Students begin their study with the question: How did the Tang and Song dynasties gain and maintain power over people and territories? After a long period of disunity, the Sui (589-618) and Tang dynasties (618-907) reunited China. The Tang rulers rebuilt a government modeled on the Han dynasty. Scholar-officials, trained in Confucianism, advised the emperor and administered the empire. Confucian principles specified that government should operate as a strict hierarchy of authority from the emperor, who enjoyed the “Mandate of Heaven” as long as he ruled justly, down to the local village official. The Tang had an active foreign policy and spread their influence along the Silk Road to the west, as far as the border of the Abbasid Caliphate. The two empires fought a battle in Central Asia in 751, from which the Chinese retreated. The Tang dynasty extended influence and cultural pressure on Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. The Song dynasty took over in 960. The Song supervised strong cultural and economic growth, with magnificent cities and cultural productions. The Visual Sourcebook of Chinese Civilization website has visuals and interactive activities to help students analyze primary sources from the Song and other dynasties. The Song instituted an official examination system for scholar-officials, which gave China a civil service bureaucracy many centuries before any other state. China had the strongest and most centralized government in the world. However, the Song struggled militarily against nomadic tribes from the north. One group of nomads overran the Northern Song region and captured the emperor. Survivors of the Song imperial family maintained the Southern Song Empire from 1126 to 1260, when they fell to the Mongols. Under the pressure from the loss of the north to “barbarians,” the Southern Song emphasized the superiority of Chinese traditions.
Despite these military problems, China became Afroeurasia’s major economic powerhouse in this period, due to the medieval economic revolution. Students analyze the question: How did the environmental conditions and technological innovations cause the medieval economic revolution? What were the effects of this revolution? Cause-and-effect graphic organizers help students analyze the many factors that contributed to the Chinese economic revolution that occurred between the seventh and thirteenth centuries. The factors of population growth, expansion of agriculture, urbanization, spread of manufacturing, and technological innovation were both causes and effects of the economic revolution, as each factor intensified the effects of the others. The economic revolution began with the introduction (from Vietnam) of champa rice, a variety that produces two crops per year. Farmers migrated to the Yangzi River valley to take advantage of the increased yield, and the population grew rapidly. Chinese laborers and merchants extended the empire’s system of canals connecting navigable rivers to about 30,000 miles. The system was financed by state taxes on trade, and led to even more trade. Blast furnaces quadrupled the output of iron and steel in the eleventh century alone. Availability of steel enabled increased production in other industries. Technicians experimented with gunpowder rockets and bombs. Woodblock printing became a standard industry, and printed books circulated widely. The hundreds of inventions of the Tang and Song eras included the magnetic compass, advanced kilns for firing porcelain, and wheels for spinning silk. In California EEI unit, “Genius Across the Centuries,” students research five important Chinese inventions of this period (tea, the manufacture of paper, wood-block printing, the compass, and gunpowder), examine a map of China’s natural regions, identify the sources of raw materials used in each invention, and evaluate the influence of these Chinese inventions on the natural systems of medieval China. The teacher points out the similarity of the agricultural revolution in Medieval Christendom at about the same time (ca. 1000). In both cases, improvements in farming technology led the way, and growth in trade, inventions, cities, and population resulted. Both cultures benefited from increased Afroeurasian trade as well.
Students then investigate this question: Why did Quanzhou become such an important site of encounter? Located on China’s southeast coast, Quanzhou was a primary destination for Arab, Persian, Indian, and Southeast Asian ships carrying merchants eager to buy China’s famed porcelain and silk. Because of its extensive internal economy and technological advances, China exported more than it imported. Although the land route to China was sometimes difficult to travel, shipping to and from the southeast coast meant that China was never isolated from outside world. China was also the largest and most centralized state in the medieval world, and government regulations of merchants and foreigners were more thorough. As one of the official trade cities of the Chinese empire, Quanzhou had large foreign communities. In this lesson, students compare the accounts of Ibn Battuta, Marco Polo, and Zhao Rugua about Quanzhou for their multiple points of view on trade and cultural exchange. They write an essay answering the focus question and citing evidence from the primary sources. Students analyze a concrete example of cross-cultural production in the porcelain vases and flasks made in China for export to the Muslim world and Spain.
Grade 7 Classroom Example: Quanzhou, Site of Encounter
(Integrated ELA/Literacy and World History)
In Ms. Hutton’s seventh-grade world history class, students are learning about medieval world history. They do this by touring Sites of Encounter, or places of exchange, in the medieval world. Quanzhou, located on China’s southeast coast, and one of the largest and busiest ports in the world, is a centerpiece in Ms. Hutton’s classroom. Students in Ms. Hutton’s class have learned how Quanzhou was a prime destination for Arab, Persian, Indian, and Southeast Asian ships carrying merchants eager to buy China’s famed porcelain and silk. As one of the official trade cities of the Chinese empire (which was the largest and most centralized state in the medieval world), Quanzhou had large foreign communities.
As an important part of learning about Quanzhou as a Site of Encounter, students in Ms. Hutton’s class participate in a guided discussion about the city’s laws, customs, and multicultural coexistence. Students practice Common Core and ELD discussion skills based on excerpts from primary-source documents to answer this discussion question: How did laws and customs help people from different cultures live together in Quanzhou?
First, Ms. Hutton divides the class up into groups of three or four. Each student in the group is asked to read one or two primary sources, write a short summary of the document, and highlight evidence that helps answer the discussion question on a graphic organizer. To support students’ interrogation of their sources, she asks them questions like, “Who benefited from this law or custom? Did the law or custom make people feel safe and welcome? Did it keep people from cheating or causing trouble?”
Ms. Hutton then directs her students to share out what they’ve written with their group. To support student discussion, Ms. Hutton provides various discussion starters designed to start the conversation, such as, “My document is about…,” “This law / custom kept people from cheating by…,” “This law/custom helped people from different cultures live together because…,” and “The evidence that supports my idea is….” She also provides starters that can be used to respond to conversation, such as, “Tell me more about…,” “What evidence do you have?” “How did you come to that conclusion?”
After all group members have shared, Ms. Hutton’s students collectively try to formulate an interpretation (or main idea) that answers the discussion question based on all of the evidence. She offers additional sentence starters to support this part of the discussion, such as “Document xx does not seem to fit with the other documents, because …,” “Document xx seems to support the ideas in document xxx …,” “I agree / disagree with what Carmen said, because …,” “Does the evidence about your law /custom support the interpretation that …,” and “Where is the evidence to support this interpretation?”
After each group has formulated an interpretation, Ms. Hutton debriefs the students as a whole class using these questions to lead the discussion: what is your interpretation, what evidence supports this interpretation, and what evidence contradicts this interpretation? She circulates the room during the conversations to evaluate, and redirect if necessary, her students’ ability to make an oral argument in response to the discussion question. As she listens to their conversation, Ms. Hutton considers her students’ ability to marshal relevant evidence in support of their argument, their use of academic language, and their overall understanding of the specific content in this lesson.
This example is summarized from a full unit, Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World - Quanzhou, available for free download, developed by the California History-Social Science Project (http://chssp.ucdavis.edu) as part of the History Blueprint initiative. Copyright © 2014, Regents of the University of California, Davis campus.
CA HSS Standards: 7.2.5, 7.3.4, 7.4.3, 7.8.3
CA HSS Analysis Skills (6–8): Research, Evidence, and Point of View 5
CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.6–8.1, 2, 9, WHST.6–8.7, 8, 9, SL.7.1, 2, 3, 4, 6
CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.7.3, 6b, 9

Buddhism spread widely and gained many followers in China during the Tang period and began to alter religious life in neighboring Korea and Japan as well. Students return to the question: How did Buddhism spread and change over time? In China Buddhist ideas intermingled with those of Daoism, a Chinese religion emphasizing private spirituality, and Confucianism, the belief system that stressed moral and ethical behavior. At its height in the ninth century, Buddhism had 50,000 monasteries in China. As Confucian scholar-officials and Daoist priests felt threatened by this “foreign religion,” the Tang emperors reversed their earlier acceptance of Buddhism and began to persecute it. One result of this persecution is that Buddhism did not become the official religion of China. Instead, Confucian, Daoist, and Buddhist beliefs and practices fused together in China to form a syncretic popular religion, emphasizing moral living, daily ritual, and dedication to family and community.
Students turn their attention to the question: How did Chinese culture, ideas, and technologies and Buddhism influence Korea and Japan? Under the Tang dynasty, China expanded its trade and cultural influence to Korea, Japan, and Southeast Asia. At sites of encounter, these societies adopted and adapted Chinese ideas and institutions and combined those with their own ideas and institutions to build distinct civilizations. This is the adoption and adaptation form of cultural encounter. In the fourth century, three kingdoms emerged to rule the Korean population, and in 670, one of those kingdoms, Silla, unified the whole peninsula. Silla was closely connected to the Tang dynasty of China. Korean elites used Chinese as a written language, but later devised a phonetic script for the Korean language. In 936, the Koryo kingdom took over rule in Korea, and adopted a civil service exam system copied after that of China. Korean merchants were engaged in trade with Japan and China, and through those networks, to Indian Ocean and Afroeurasian trade networks as well. The Korea Society powerpoint, “Silla Korea and the Silk Road,” has images and archaeological evidence that provide opportunities for students to analyze cultural interaction and trade across Eurasia.
In a similar manner, Japan was influenced by China and Korea, but adapted outside institutions and ideas to fit with its own indigenous culture. Before the sixth century, Japan was an agricultural society ruled by land-holding clan chieftains. Their religion, Shinto, emphasized the influence of the supernatural world and spirits of the ancestors. One clan rose above the others, founded a central state and a dynasty called the Yamato. Those rulers claimed the title of “heavenly sovereign,” or emperor. About 850 CE, the Yamato rulers lost their grip on political affairs, and aristocratic palace families assumed real power. The emperors retained their throne but played mainly a ritual role. The pattern of aristocratic clans warring and succeeding one another as rulers under the sovereignty of a ceremonial but powerless emperor continued into modern times.
Between the third and sixth centuries, when China was politically fragmented, many Chinese and Koreans migrated to Japan in search of refuge or opportunity. Those newcomers introduced many innovations, including advanced metallurgy, writing, silk production, textile manufacture, paper-making, and Buddhism. Japanese tradition links the introduction of Buddhism and beginning of Chinese cultural influence with Prince Shokotu (574-622). China’s immense power under the Tang Dynasty stimulated Japanese interest in Chinese and Korean culture. Literary scholars, officials, and Buddhist monks traveled to Japan. In turn, Japanese intellectuals went west to seek knowledge, learn Confucian statecraft, and acquire Buddhist texts, some made in Korea with some of the earliest known wood-block printing technology. The Japanese gradually adapted Buddhism to fit with older Shinto practices. For example, Shinto nature gods became associated with Buddhist spirits and saints. The Zen school of Buddhism spread widely among laboring men and women.
From about 1000 CE, the Japanese aristocratic class creatively combined Chinese and Korean ideas with Japanese ways to form a new civilization with distinctive institutions, literature, and arts. Japanese officials adopted rules of government derived from imperial China but tailored them to their own smaller population and territory. Scholars developed a writing system that used simplified Chinese characters to represent Japanese sounds. Moreover, several aristocratic women wrote literary works in Japanese. Students may read selections from the Tale of Genji, a novel about a courtier’s life written by Lady Murasaki Shikibu sometime between 990 and 1012.
Even though China had a great influence on Japan, Japanese government and society developed in its own direction. Students investigate the question: What influence did samurai customs and values have on the government and society of medieval Japan? Japan had an emperor, but the emperor and his court had no real power. Clans continued to control regional areas of Japan. Important clans fought each other for more land, power, and control over the weak central government. In the 1180s, the Miramoto clan dominated Japan. They instituted a military government headed by a “great general,” or shogun. The highest social status in the clan and in society went to the samurai, professional fighters. Most samurai were vassals of clan leaders, or daimyo, in a system that was similar to feudal lordship in Christendom at the same time. Samurai were dedicated to a code of courage, honor, and martial skill. To analyze samurai culture, students read The Tale of the Heike and view woodblock prints. The Asia for Educators website has a short excerpt of this story of samurai warfare, and there are many woodblock prints on the Web, although most date from later periods. During those centuries, Japan’s agriculture, population, and urbanization continued to expand. Exchanges with China and Korea grew, as merchants traded luxury goods in return for Japanese silver, copper, timber, and steel swords. By 1300, East Asia was an interconnected region dominated economically and culturally by China.

The Americas, 300-1490
How did the environment affect the expansion of agriculture, population, cities, and empires in Mesoamerica and the Andean region?
Why did the Maya civilization, the Aztec Empire and the Inca Empire gain more power over people and territories?
How did Mesoamerican religion develop and change over time?
Under the Aztecs, why was Tenochtitlán a site of encounter?
To begin their study of civilizations in the Americas, students investigate the question: How did the environment affect the expansion of agriculture, population, cities, and empires in Mesoamerica and the Andean region? One important environmental factor was the separation of the Americas and Afroeurasia after 15,000 BCE. As a result, different ecosystems developed in the Americas than in Afroeurasia. The Americas had no beasts of burden; corn was the major staple rather than rice or wheat. A second environmental factor is the sheer size and variety of habitats in the Americas. The north-south axis of the Americas extends nearly 11,000 miles, from the frigid Arctic rim to the equatorial rain forests of the Amazon River basin to Tierra Del Fuego at the southern tip of South America. A mountain spine runs nearly the entire length, and divides the Americas longitudinally, separating narrow coastal plains on the Pacific from broad plains on the eastern side that stretch toward the Atlantic. Several great river systems, especially the Mississippi and the Amazon, have been channels of human communication since ancient times. Thousands of different cultures, speaking many different languages and following different customs, lived on the two continents. Their ways of life varied from gathering and hunting to agrarian-urban states. Lesson 2 or 4 of the California EEI unit “Sun Gods and Jaguar Kings” guides students through the landforms and climate zones that formed the environment for the two urbanized regions of the Americas.
Agriculture developed independently in Mesoamerica and the Andean highlands after 3000 BCE. Farming and village settlement spread through those regions and by the second millennium BCE, the Olmec civilization appeared in Mesoamerica and the Chávin civilization in the central Andes. Unlike Mesopotamia, Egypt, China, or India, these civilizations did not develop along great rivers. The catalyst for developing the Olmec civilization may have been surplus farming produce, population growth, or increasing trade. Connected by exchange of crops and products from the ocean, the lowlands, the highlands, and the rainforest, the Chávin civilization extended across the high Andes range to the lowlands on either side. After the Olmec and Chavín fell, other civilizations took their place or grew up nearby. The Maya, Aztec, and Inca Empires built on the culture and accomplishments of two thousand years of previous civilizations.
Between about 200 to 900 CE, the Maya region of southern Mexico, Guatemala, and Belize had more than fifty independent city-states. The students focus on this question: Why did the Maya civilization gain power over people and territories? The teacher points out that although the Maya built on a basis of civilizations before them, the Maya city-states built larger and grander buildings, developed advanced writing, mathematics and astronomy, and had a more hierarchical and wealthy society. Two factors that gave the Maya power were rich agriculture and widespread trade. Among the largest cities were Tikal in Guatemala and Calakmul in Mexico. Maya societies produced monumental architecture, astronomic observatories, a pictographic writing system that yielded libraries of thousands of books, and a sophisticated calendar system based on a fifty-two-year cycle. These innovations would have given the Maya society strong cultural power, because many neighboring people would have been impressed. Students may compare mathematical systems that developed in Afroeurasia with Maya mathematics, which utilized positional notation, the concept of zero, and a base-20 numerical system. The monarchs and aristocratic families who ruled these city-states kept order and defended their lands in wars with other city-states. They also performed elaborate religious rituals to conciliate the gods who, Mayans believed, commanded the rain and sun. These rituals included blood-letting by members of the elite and royal families. The elites drew blood from their own bodies to offer to the gods. The Maya also sacrificed enemies captured in battle (instead of killing them on the battlefield). Farmers, artisans, and hunters paid taxes and supplied labor for construction of public temples, palaces, and ceremonial ball courts. After about 750 CE, warfare intensified among city-states, monumental construction diminished, and cities were gradually abandoned. Deforestation, erosion, and drought may have contributed to their decline.
The Aztec Empire emerged in the fifteenth century. Initially, students focus on: Why did the Aztec Empire gain more power over people and territories? The Aztecs, a people who originally migrated from northern Mexico, owed a strong cultural debt to the Maya, Teotihuacán, and the Toltec cities in Mesoamerica. The Aztecs won their power by warfare. They unified much of central Mexico by defeating all other powerful cities and states. They created a state based on ingenious methods of farming, collection of tribute from conquered peoples, and an extensive network of markets and trade routes.
Next students investigate the question: How did Mesoamerican religion change over time? The Aztec practiced ritual sacrifice of war captives (instead of killing them on the battlefield), but to a greater extent than the Maya had. The Aztecs believed that the god of the sun would stop shining and the universe would collapse without a constant supply of human hearts and blood. Comparing Maya and Aztec practices shows students how the Mesoamerican religion changed over time. Students may analyze visuals from Aztec tribute records, the Florentine Codex, and other codices made in the early Spanish period. Lesson 5 of the California EEI unit “Sun Gods and Jaguar Kings” has an excellent activity based on the Aztec tribute records as sources. Ultimately, the resentment of conquered people made the Aztec Empire unstable.
Students also study the question: Under the Aztecs, why was Tenochtitlán a site of encounter? This is the first part of their study, as they will return to “Mexico City” as a site of encounter in the Global Convergence unit. Tenochtitlán was built on an island in Lake Texcoco, with three causeways linking it to the mainland. The city was built in circles, with temples and government buildings in an inner square, houses in the outer circles, and floating garden beds on the lake around the city. It was one of the largest cities in the world at that time. Its markets contained vast amounts and variety of goods from all over Mesoamerica.
Students compare the Aztec empire with the Inca state that arose in Andean South America, with the question: Why did the Inca Empire gain power over people and territories? Like the Aztecs, the Incas built on a series of earlier civilizations, but combined cities and states together into a larger empire than any before in that region. The Inca rulers built a highly centralized political system that included methods of food distribution in times of poor harvests. They also created a network of about 25,000 miles of government-controlled roads that ran along the Andes spine and served military, administrative, and commercial purposes. The Incas did rely on military power but they also offered important social benefits to the population. In contrast to the Aztecs, the Incas did not have a writing system, but they used Andean quipus, or sets of colored and knotted strings, to keep complex records. To conclude this unit, students can meet in groups and prepare graphic organizers comparing power, religion, social customs, agriculture, intellectual developments, and trade in each culture.

West Africa, 900-1400
How did the environment affect the development and expansion of the Ghana and Mali empires and the trade networks that connected them to the rest of Afroeurasia?
Why was Mali a site of encounter? What were the effects of the exchanges at Mali?
How did Arab/North African and West African perspectives differ on West African kingdoms?
As of 500 CE, groups of farming and animal-herding peoples lived in West Africa, a region with four large zones of climate and vegetation running west to east. Students begin with the question: How did the environment affect the development and expansion of the Ghana and Mali empires and the trade networks that connected them to the rest of Afroeurasia? The most northerly belt is the intensely arid Sahara, home to oasis-dwellers and pastoral nomads. Just south of the desert is the semiarid Sahel zone, where cattle and camel herding predominated. Third is the tropical grassland, or savanna, which had sufficient rainfall to support farmers and their fields of rice, sorghum, and millet. In the far south is the wet tropical forest. There, settled life depended on cultivation of root crops and other forest foods. In the Sahel and savanna, agriculture and herding supported the growth of regional trade. Tracing a great arc across West Africa, the Niger River provided a natural highway of communication linking different ecological zones. Farming, trade, and early development of iron smelting stimulated town building. The city of Jenne-jeno, built in the early centuries CE, was home to artisans who produced iron tools, copperware, gold jewelry, and fine painted ceramics.
In addition to local markets, West Africa contained rich deposits of gold. Both Muslim and Christian rulers and traders in the Mediterranean region craved African gold, notably for coinage. West African merchants acquired gold from mines in the Sudan and shipped it to towns in the Sahel, where Arab and Berber merchants carried the gold north on trans-Saharan camel caravan routes. Some of this African bullion then flowed into Europe or eastward toward India. Students use the Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World interactive map to investigate these environmental factors. Then they read Ibn Battuta’s account of the perilous crossing of the Sahara in an excerpt from the Mali lesson of the “Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World” unit. They read the text individually first, then meet in group to discuss and report on one paragraph of the reading, and finally read the text again and answer text-dependent questions.
The centralized state of Ghana emerged around the eighth century in the western part of the Sahel zone. The king of Ghana commanded a large royal household, a hierarchy of officials, and an army of infantry archers. The Ghana empire had Muslim officials, though the kings probably did not convert. Ghana slowly crumbled in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, but around 1240, Mali emerged to rule over a large part of the western Sudan. Mali’s rulers accumulated wealth collecting tribute from African farmers and taxing trans-Saharan trade. The royal court employed staffs of both foreign and native-born Muslims as administrators, and Arabic became the written language of government and diplomacy. Most of the kings and their officials professed Islam and introduced Islamic law, though most of West Africa’s population adhered to their local religions for several more centuries. In the 1300s Timbuktu, a city near the Niger River, rose as a regional center of trade and Islamic learning.
The gold trade across the Sahara involved Ghana and Mali in Afroeurasian trade networks. Students focus on Mali with the question: What made Mali a site of encounter? What were the effects of the exchanges at Mali? Northbound caravans also shipped ivory, ostrich feathers, and slaves captured in raids and wars. Merchants marched these captives, including many women, to the Mediterranean or Middle East principally to serve in Muslim households. The southbound trade included salt from Saharan mines, a commodity that commanded huge demand in West Africa. Other southbound commodities included copper, horses, and Arabic books. Arabic- and Berber-speaking merchants from North Africa likely introduced Islam to West Africa in the eighth century. They established bonds with Sudanic traders, many of whom converted to the new faith. Even for those Africans who did not convert to Islam, Muslim culture had a significant impact on West African architecture, education, and languages. The “Sightseeing in Mali” gallery walk activity guides students through analyzing artifacts from Mali, such as mosques, statues of mounted warriors, an astronomy book, and the university at Timbuktu. The artifacts show that the West Africans adopted Muslim culture but also adapted it to fit their own culture.
In order to probe more deeply into the history of West African kingdoms, students analyze this question: How did Arab/North African and West African perspectives differ on West African kingdoms? The “West African and Arab/North African Perspectives” activity contains excerpts from Arab/North African sources by al-Bakri, al-Umari, Ibn Khaldun, and Ibn Battuta, and one West African source, The Epic of Sundiata. All of the written sources about the West African kingdoms were written by Arab/North African writers, who thought that West African culture was more primitive than Arab culture. If the historian relies on their evidence alone, he or she would think that Islam and the gold trade were almost the creators of West African states. Students access a West African perspective in the Epic of Sundiata (Sunjata), a heroic king associated with the rise of Mali. The epic was passed down by griots in an oral tradition until the mid-twentieth century, when one version of it was recorded in writing. In the close reading activity, students learn how to identify perspective as they compare passages. At the conclusion of this lesson, students work with the Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World map to analyze the position of Mali in the Islamic world, and compare that position at the end of a single trade route and within a single trade circle with Cairo’s position at the center of many trade routes and three trade circles. A brief discussion on the differences between the cultural center and the periphery will introduce students to this geographical concept.

Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World, 1150-1490
How did the Mongol Empire destroy states and increase the interconnection of Afroeurasia?
What were the effects of the exchanges at Majorca and Calicut?
How did increasing interconnection and trade, competition between states (and their people), and technological innovations lead to voyages of exploration?
Around the year 1000 in Afroeurasia, technological innovations in agriculture caused massive increases in productivity, population growth, settlement of new lands, and a great expansion of manufacturing, trade, and urbanization. The agricultural revolution between the Tang and Song dynasties made China the center of industry, as it produced new inventions and luxury products desired throughout Afroeurasia. Innovations spurred a huge expansion of agriculture in Europe, cultivation of new lands, expansion of trade, and a rebirth of manufacturing, trade, urban culture, and education. Networks of commercial, technological and cultural exchange covered most of Afroeurasia. In the center, the Muslim world (now divided into many states) and India prospered as producers of goods such as cotton cloth, spices, and swords, and also as middlemen along the east-west trade routes. While people rarely traveled from Spain to China, products, technologies, and ideas did. From 1200 to 1490, those networks grew stronger, busier, and tighter.
The attacks and domination of the Mongol Empire had a huge negative effect on states, empires, and many people of Eurasia, but it also greatly extended trade, travel, and exchange between Afroeurasian societies. The teacher introduces the question: How did the Mongol Empire destroy states and increase the interconnection of Afroeurasia? In the late twelfth century, nomadic warriors from the steppe and deserts north of China, the Mongol tribes (and other Central Asian nomadic tribes), were united by a charismatic leader, Chinggis (Genghis) Khan, who lead them to conquests across Eurasia. At its height, the Mongol Empire was the largest land empire in world history. Mongols were fierce and highly mobile fighters who terrified the people they conquered, even though their numbers were small. Students examine maps of the Mongol conquests and empire, and compare these with the Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World interactive map, which has physical, religious, political and other maps of Afroeurasia. After Chinggis Khan’s death, the Mongol Empire split up into four khanates. Chinggis’ grandson, Hulagu Khan, was ruler of the Il-Khanate. Since the Muslim states were divided, individually they were no match for the Mongol warriors. Hulagu conquered Persia, Syria and part of Anatolia and destroyed the Abbasid Caliphate’s capital of Baghdad. Although some feared that the Mongols would destroy the Muslim world, the Egyptian Mamluk Sultanate fought the Mongol army and stopped its advance. Mongols in the Khanate of the Golden Horde overran Russia and attacked Poland and Eastern Europe. The Khanate of the Great Khan went to another grandson, Kubilai Khan, who took over China from the Song dynasty. Kubilai established the Yuan dynasty and kept many Chinese customs, but replaced Confucian scholar-officials with foreign administrators. The Mongols conquered states in Southeast Asia and tried twice to invade Japan in the late thirteenth century, but failed both times. The domination of the Mongols did not last long; three of the four Mongol khanates fell by 100 years after the conquest.
Although the Mongols killed many people and destroyed many cities in its conquest, after the conquest, the Mongols tolerated all religions and protected and promoted trade across Eurasia. Under their protection, the land trade route from China to the Mediterranean re-opened and trade boomed. The Mongols also moved people around throughout their empire, using, for example, Persian and Arab administrators in China, and facilitating the journey of Marco Polo (and many other less famous people) from Venice to China. The increase in interaction also spread Chinese technologies and ideas into the Muslim and Christian worlds. To understand both the negative and positive effects of the Mongol conquest and empire, student groups do a gallery walk with visuals of a Mongol passport, hunting scroll, gold textile, and a Persian tile with Chinese motifs, and an excerpt from Marco Polo describing the Mongolian postal service. Students cite evidence from each primary source on a source analysis template to answer the question: How did the Mongol Empire increase the interconnection of Afroeurasia?
After the Mongol khanates fell, new states and empires arose. As the Il-Khanate declined, Turkish kingdoms replaced the Mongols. These Turkish warriors originally came from Central Asia, and spread into the Muslim world after their conversion to Islam. Combining dedication to religious ideas with the mounted warrior tradition of Central Asia, they took over the settled Muslim lands. In the west, Turkish armies took over most of Anatolia from the Byzantine Empire (a conquest which set off the Crusades). One of the Turkish leaders, Osman, created the Ottoman Empire in 1326. He and his successors conquered all of Anatolia, Greece, and most of the Balkan peninsula in eastern Europe, before conquering Constantinople in 1453 and bringing the Byzantine Empire to an end. Other Turkish dynasties took over Persia (the Safavids) and northern India (the Mughals). In China, the native Ming dynasty removed the Mongols and returned the administration of China’s government to Confucian scholar-officials.
In the remainder of this unit, students with engage with this question: How did increasing interconnection and trade, competition between states (and their people), and technological innovations lead to voyages of exploration? Most states and empires supported trade as the rulers and elite groups wanted access to products such as silk from China, Persia, Syria, and Egypt; spices from India and Southeast Asia; cotton cloth from India and Egypt; and gold from West Africa. Kings and their officials also realized that trade made their states strong and increased their tax income. Some used their military power to take over trade centers that belonged to other states or to dominate trade routes. As trade connections, imperial expansion, and travel increased in Afroeurasia, both conflict and cooperation occurred at sites of encounter. Competition between states for land and resources and between the followers of different religions made many encounters violent. At the same time, people from different cultures found ways to cooperate so that they could trade and coexist.
Of the major regions of Afroeurasia, medieval Christendom had one of the least developed but also one of the fastest growing economies. There were few European products that people in Asia and Africa wanted to buy, but there was a large and growing market in Europe for Asian spices, cloth, porcelain, and other goods. Europe had to export silver and gold to pay for these goods. Most of the silver ended up in China. Between about 1000 and 1300 CE, the ships and traders from Venice and Genoa rose to dominate long-distance commerce to Europe from Cairo and other Muslim trade cities in Southwestern Asia and North Africa. During the same time period, certain states of Western Christendom, notably England, France, Castile, and Aragon grew stronger and more centralized. The kings of Castile, Aragon, and other Christian kingdoms of Iberia fought against Muslim kingdoms of al-Andalus for both religious and political reasons. As a case study of Christian, Muslim and Jewish interaction in medieval Iberia, students analyze the site of encounter, Majorca, with the question: What were the effects of the exchanges at Majorca? King James I of Aragon conquered this island off the eastern coast of the Iberian Peninsula from its Muslim Almohad rulers in 1229. Students read excerpts from James’s Autobiography in a guided activity that teaches them how to cite evidence. They learn that James was motivated in part by Majorca’s position as a trading and shipping center for the western Mediterranean and the Maghribi ports, which controlled the gold trade from Mali. Catalan merchants urged James to take over Majorca because they wanted to gain access to those markets. On the Majorcan base and elsewhere in Iberia, Catalans, Genoese, Iberian Jews, Iberian Muslims (Moors), and Portuguese developed maps, such as the Catalan Atlas, ships, and navigational technology which gave Mediterranean shippers access to the Atlantic Ocean. Accessing the Catalan Atlas reproductions online, students closely examine this early map of Afroeurasia to identify its improved features, such as accurate coastlines and a compass rose. In a gallery walk, they analyze objects, such as the lateen sail and the astrolabe, adopted from the Islamic world, and the compass, invented in China, and visuals of medieval ships to identify the technological improvements. These examples demonstrate the synthesis of creative energies that a site of encounter often produces. Using this technology, Catalans and Portuguese began exploring the African coast (looking for a different route to the gold fields of West Africa). However, increasing intolerance of the Iberian Christian kingdoms to Jews and Muslims ended that multicultural society by 1500. In the “Investigative Reporting on Intolerance,” student groups read excerpts from al-Idrisi, Benjamin of Tudela, Ramon Llull, or Ferdinand and Isabella. Then the student group designs and acts out an investigative report (as for TV news or a cell phone I-Report). Each student in the group plays a role in the report, which can be videotaped, recorded on a cell phone, or acted out live. All reports are shown to the class, and students record specific information and evidence on a chart. The teacher concludes by pointing out that England, France, and other states also expelled Jews in this period. Tired of the persecution, many European Jews migrated to Poland, where the government gave them security and rights, Russia, and elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
Next the students switch to a site of encounter in India, Calicut, a major trade center of the Indian Ocean trading network. As they explore the question: What were the effects of the exchanges at Calicut? students learn about both the fifteenth-century Indian Ocean trade and the advent of the Portuguese in 1498. In the “What’s so Hot about Spices?” activity, students examine written and visual primary sources about popular spices, where they were grown, and how they were used as flavorings, medicines, and perfumes. Using the Sites of Encounter in the Medieval World map, students study the Indian Ocean monsoon patterns and tables of medieval sailing seasons to determine the effects on ships, merchants, and sailors. Ships from many states visited Calicut, including Chinese junks and the huge fleets led by Admiral Zheng He. Between 1405 and 1433, the Ming emperor sent out enormous fleets of hundreds of ships on seven major voyages to trade and collect tribute in the Indian Ocean, advancing as far west as the Red Sea and East Africa. Although after 1433, the Ming emperors did not send out any more naval fleets, trade continued. In the “Analyzing Perspectives on Calicut and Trade” group activity, students read primary sources written by Arab travelers, Jewish merchants, Persian ambassadors, Chinese officers and explorers, and Portuguese explorers. Each group member chooses an equal share of the sources, which he or she reads aloud to the group and then guides a discussion, as everyone else fills out a source analysis chart. Students use the evidence to write an essay on the question: What were the effects of the exchanges at Calicut? The lesson has the writing prompt, instructions for evidence use, an effects organization chart, an evidence analysis chart, an essay frame, and a grading rubric. The teacher selects among these resources those that will support English Learners and struggling writers as appropriate.
To conclude, the teacher returns to central question: How did increasing interconnection and trade, competition between states (and their people), and technological innovations lead to voyages of exploration? He or she asks students to identify examples of each of these causes from Majorca and Calicut. Comparison of the voyages of Zheng He with those of Columbus and/or Da Gama makes a good transition to the next unit.

Global Convergence, 1450-1750
What impact did human expansion in the voyages of exploration have on the environment, trade networks, and global interconnection?
Why did the Europeans use colonialism to interact with Native Americans and some Southeast Asians? What were the effects of colonialism on the colonized people?
What were the effects of exchanges at Tenochtitlán/Mexico City in the 16th through 18th centuries?
Was slavery always racial?
How did the gunpowder empires (Ming/Manchu China, Mughal India, Safavid Persia, Ottoman Empire, Russia, Spain, later France and England) extend their power over people and territories?
This unit begins with the question: What impact did human expansion in the voyages of exploration have on the environment, trade networks, and global interconnection? In the last unit, students investigated the state of Afroeurasian trade and power before the voyages of exploration and the technological developments in ships and navigation that enabled the European voyages. They examined the Chinese voyages of exploration led by Zheng He and the initial Portuguese voyages around Africa to India and Calicut. Now they turn to the Spanish and Portuguese voyages across the Atlantic begun by Columbus. As a result of these voyages, new oceanic routes connected nearly every inhabited part of the world. The Early Modern Period witnessed greater global connection and exchange, as European conquests and encounters in the Americas linked both hemispheres in significant ways.
People, plants, and animals were introduced to places where they had previously been unknown. This “Columbian Exchange” led to profound changes in economies, diets, social organization, and, in the Americas, to a massive devastation of Indian populations because of exposure to new disease microorganisms originating in Afroeurasia. The Columbian Exchange marks the important biological exchange of disease, flora, and fauna between both hemispheres. Students investigate the transfers of American crops such as maize, potatoes, and manioc to Afroeurasia, as well as addictive substances such as tobacco and chocolate. From Afroeurasia, the Americas acquired horses, cows, pigs, and sheep. Introduction of new staple crops helped increase the population in much of Afroeurasia, and the imported animals and plants transformed the landscapes of the Americas. The Colombian Exchange also occurred across the Pacific Ocean: American crops transplanted to China grew the Chinese economy, while the chili pepper sent to Southeast Asia affected food preparation, the economy, and culture. The diffusion of Afroeurasian diseases to the Americas had catastrophic demographic consequences. The mortality of as much as 90% of Native American population allowed European newcomers to conquer territories in the Americas. Migration by Europeans and forced migration of Africans to the Americas led to a radically different population mix and the emergence of new hybrid populations and cultures. Africans enslaved and forced to migrate outnumbered Europeans in the Americas until the nineteenth century. The loss of so many people caused severe economic and demographic disruption in tropical Africa. The effects of the Columbian Exchange were profound environmental change and huge human population shifts.
European voyages to the Americas and the Indian Ocean transformed world trade networks. The Spanish extracted precious metals, gold and especially silver, and the Portuguese, Dutch, French, and English extracted raw materials, such as lumber and furs, from their American colonies and shipped them to Afroeurasia. Europeans set up plantations to grow cash crops that were exported to Afroeurasia. The result was a massive influx of wealth into Europe. However, Asia remained the world’s most productive center of agriculture and manufacturing until near the end of this era. Chinese products were so highly desired in the European market that a substantial portion of the silver taken from the New World ended up in China as payment for Chinese products exported to Europe. European states and merchants also took over the shipping of products around the world’s oceans and seas, gradually replacing the merchant fleets of other regions. These European states frequently battled with each other to dominate shipping routes, trade cities, and lands with desirable resources. The Portuguese battled Indian, Arab, and Southeast Asian shippers in the Indian Ocean, but the Portuguese were soon themselves attacked and replaced by the Dutch, who took over the spice islands of Southeast Asia. French and English fleets and pirates battled Spanish fleets in the Atlantic and Pacific. Ocean trade expanded and became more militarized as the Europeans took over shipping. Students analyze maps to see how the more important voyages of exploration led to the development of global trading patterns and the location of European colonies by 1750.
Next students investigate the question: Why did the Europeans use colonialism to interact with Native Americans and some Southeast Asians? What were the effects of colonialism on the colonized people? It’s important for students to recognize that the Europeans did not take over China, India, Africa, and most of Asia until the nineteenth century. For this entire period, therefore, the major Afroeurasian centers – China, India, and the Islamic World – were too strong for Europeans to conquer. In lands where states were not as strong, Europeans established colonies. European armies used gunpowder weapons to defeat local resistance. Europeans became the government rulers and officials and changed the laws. They also took desirable land away from the native owners and gave it to Europeans. Often the Europeans used the land to grow tropical commercial crops for sale in Afroeurasia. Sometimes the European government and army forced the native people to work for the Europeans as well. Finally, European Christian missionaries spread through the colonies trying to convert local people to Christianity. Some states, such as Spain and Portugal, supported these missionaries and helped to force local people to change their religion; other states, such as the Netherlands, did not pay much attention to missionary activities. The teacher uses a guided discussion format to address the question: Why did the Europeans use colonialism to interact with Native Americans and some Southeast Asians? Students brainstorm possible motives of Europeans and weigh the relative importance of power, wealth, competition with other European states, and religion, using a discussion guide with sentence starters modeling academic language. As a group, students rank the possible motives and explain their reasons, and each student individually writes a one-sentence interpretation (argument or claim) answering the question. The teacher emphasizes that although many states had conquered sites of encounter in the past, colonialism was a new form of interaction between cultures that was unequal and exploitative.
In addition to conquering areas where there were divisions among many states, such as Sumatra, Java, Malaysia, and the Philippines, or where there were no states, such as the Caribbean islands, Spanish conquerors took over both the Aztec and Inca empires in the early sixteenth century. Students assess explanations that historians have given for their defeat at the hands of small numbers of Europeans. Two key factors aided European military efforts. The first was the introduction of infectious diseases, such as smallpox and measles, which were endemic in Africa and Eurasia, but against which American Indian populations lacked even partial immunities. These diseases began to ravage societies in both North and South America shortly after the Spanish invasions got underway. The second factor was Spanish success at allying with local groups, notably the Tlaxcalans, who wished to free themselves from Aztec rule. In the California EEI unit “Broken Jade and Tarnished Gold,” students learn that the Spanish needed the natural resources of the region, with a goal of sustaining their own economic and political systems in the “Old World.” They explore many human social factors including greed, religious fervor, and disease that left the Spanish in control of vast lands in Central and South America, eventually propelling the empire to expand into the lands to the north, including California.
Grade Seven Classroom Example: The Spanish Conquest of Mexico
To assess the impact of the Spanish conquest, Mr. Brown’s students return to the question: What were effects of exchanges at Tenochtitlán/Mexico City in the 16th through 18th centuries? The students begin by analyzing images of the conquest and interactions between Spanish and Aztecs/Mexica, which can be found in the image exercises in the “Conquest of Mexico” materials at the American Historical Association’s Teaching and Learning in a Digital Age website.
After Mr. Brown explains how to analyze perspective or point of view, student pairs source the images and identify evidence of exchanges, effects of exchanges, and perspective. As they share their evidence, Mr. Brown guides and refines their understanding of perspective or point of view. Next they engage in a close reading of excerpts from accounts of the conquest and its early impact from the Letters of Cortés, the True History of Díaz del Castillo, Broken Spears, the Florentine Codex, and the Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies by De Las Casas. (Excerpts in English and Spanish from all of these works are readily available on the web, except for Broken Spears, collection of Aztec writings about the conquest that was originally written in Nahautl and recently edited and translated into English.) Sometimes Mr. Brown has all students read every document; other times he divides the documents between student groups. (The most effective division would have students read one Spanish account and one Aztec account that addressed the same event or topic.)
Each student reads the document individually first, and then discusses the question: What is this reading about? with a partner. In the second reading, students fill out a sentence deconstruction chart that breaks down the most crucial sentence or sentences of the text, complete a worksheet that helps them identify unfamiliar vocabulary in context, and then answer text-dependent questions. For the third reading, the students mark up and annotate the text, using cognitive markers (for exchanges, effects of exchanges, loaded words, evidence of perspective or point of view, questions).
After reading all the documents, students meet in groups, identify the exchanges and effects of exchanges and cite evidence for each on an effects analysis graphic organizer. As Mr. Brown displays the graphic organizer of several groups on the elmo, he or she helps students group together common exchanges, state their points in academic language, and understand any unclear points. Students investigate examples of the hybrid nature of Colonial Latin America and assess the contributions of native peoples to the cultural, economic, and social practices of the region by 1750. (Two concrete examples of this are the building of the Mexico City cathedral on the location of the central pyramid, as well as other changes to the spatial geography of Mexico City, and the Virgin of Guadalupe. Seventeenth-century Dutch, English, and French conquest and colonization in the Caribbean and North America are introduced and can be compared with developments in Latin America.)
CA HSS Standards: 7.7.3, 7.11.2
CA HSS Analysis Skills (6–8): Chronological and Spatial Thinking 3, Research, Evidence, and Point of View 5
CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.6–8.1, 2, SL.7.1, 4, L4a
CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.7.1, 6a, 6b, 12a; ELD.P.II.7.12a

Next students investigate the transport of African slaves to the Americas and the creation of racialized slavery with the question: Was slavery always racial? The teacher refers back to examples of slavery in the ancient and medieval world, such as Rome, where slaves belonged to all ethnic groups and were usually captives in war. In the medieval Mediterranean, Christians and Muslims enslaved captives who did not belong to their own religions. However, slavery was not necessarily for life, and the children of slaves were not always slaves themselves. In the Americas and the trade circuit scholars call the Atlantic World, European slave-traders imported kidnapped Africans to work on plantations and mines in response to shortages of Indian labor in the Americas. Since relatively few Europeans wished to migrate to the Americas to perform grueling labor in tropical climates, European planters and mine operators turned to western Africa to acquire large numbers of enslaved men and women and thereby have the labor for large-scale capitalist enterprises in the Americas. In the Americas, slavery became racialized and Europeans began to cultivate the idea that Africans were lesser people who were supposed to be enslaved. Students analyze visuals of the Middle Passage and maps of the Atlantic World trade routes and the numbers of slaves who were transported to the Caribbean and Brazil, which vastly outnumbered those who were transported to the Thirteen Colonies. Attention to these points will prepare students for studying colonial economies and slavery in Grade 8. Africans took part in the world economy in ways that profited rulers and traders but that caused misery for millions. The forced removal of millions of people also had severe economic and demographic consequences in tropical Africa.
The final question of this unit is: How did the gunpowder empires (Ming/Manchu China, Mughal India, Safavid Persia, Ottoman Empire, Russia, Spain, later France and England) extend their power over people and territories? Wide-scale use of gunpowder technology – cannon and firearms – transformed warfare and armies. Since these weapons were so expensive, only states could afford them. Gunpowder technology revolutionized warfare and enabled the power of the central state or empire to expand greatly. With firearms, state armies could dominate internal rivals and decimate larger armies that had no firearms. As a result, some states built large gunpowder empires using the power of the new technology. These gunpowder empires, which included Spain, Russia, Ming China, the Mughal Empire in India, the Safavids in Persia, and the Ottoman Empire, were able to dominate weaker polities and expand their territories. In England, France, Japan under the Tokugawa Shogunate, and many other smaller states, rulers used the power of their armies to deprive feudal lords of their local power and centralize authority in their own hands. As a result, states became more centralized and governments grew stronger. Gunpowder empires and states used their armies to attack other states as well. For example, in the sixteenth century, Ottoman armies attacked the Austrian Empire, Hungary, and Poland. French and English armies and navies fought wars against the Spanish and Austrian Habsburg empires.

The Impact of Ideas, 1500-1750 
How did the Reformation divide the Christian Church, millions of people, and European states?
How did world religions change and spread during the early modern period?
What were the effects of the Renaissance and the Scientific Revolution?
How were the social contract and other political ideas of the Enlightenment revolutionary?
This unit investigates religious, cultural, and intellectual changes in the period from 1500 to 1750. Students see the impact of new information flowing into Europe from the “discoveries” in the Americas as a more critical factor in reshaping European thought than the cultural movement of the Renaissance. While the Reformation was a critically important development in Christianity, other world religions continued to change and spread in this period as well. To reflect this new historiography, this unit focuses on two strands, religion and cultural and intellectual developments, both in the world context. Rewriting of this unit also addresses the problem of teaching abstract concepts to seventh-graders in May and June. It streamlines the content to focus on the most important developments and recommends activities that will engage students as well as challenge them.
To introduce the Reformation, the teacher reminds students that there was only one Church in Western Europe, headed by the Pope in Rome, but that there were other Christian churches elsewhere, such as the Orthodox churches. In the 1500s, Roman Christianity split into multiple denominations. Students will focus on the question: How did the Reformation divide the Christian Church, millions of people, and European states? By the early sixteenth century, criticism of the clerical and institutional practices of the Catholic Church (e.g., the selling of indulgences and corruption by the clergy) was extensive. Martin Luther not only criticized these practices, but also fundamental doctrines such as the validity of five of the seven sacraments and the need for clergy and good works to achieve salvation. He created a new theology that Christian religious practice be strictly guided by knowledge from within the Bible alone and that salvation was justified by ‘faith alone.’ Students can analyze Martin Luther’s account of his tower experience, using the excerpt, sentence deconstruction chart, and analysis chart on the Blueprint for History blogpost “Martin Luther Primary Source and CCSS Activity.” A generation later, John Calvin argued for predestination, whereby those elected by God were certain of salvation. The distinctions between Lutheranism and Calvinism were significant and led to many separate denominations within Protestantism. Students examine a diagram showing how modern Christian churches descended from these original splits in Protestantism. The Catholic Reformation in response to Protestantism transformed the Roman Church as well, especially in its practices. All churches stressed education, understanding of doctrine, and social discipline for lay people.
The Reformation had dramatic effects on European people. All of the new denominations, Catholic and Protestant, were intolerant of each other and would not allow believers from another denomination to coexist with their believers. Mobs of ordinary people sometimes fought over religious differences. The rulers of states chose one denomination and required all the people living in the state to belong to that denomination. For example, if Calvinists found themselves living in a Lutheran state, they had either to hide their belief or move to another country. The threat of Protestantism added more fuel to the already growing religious persecution in Spain, which had expelled the Jews in 1492. Spain expelled all Muslims between 1500 and 1614 and persecuted converts and dissenters in the Spanish Inquisition. Spanish identity became associated with Roman Catholic belief and a strong sense of the Spanish mission to protect and spread it, which showed also in the strenuous and successful efforts of the Spanish to convert the local people in their Latin American colonies and the Philippines. Protestant states were also intolerant and executed Catholics and members of other Protestant denominations. In addition, state authorities executed 50,000 people, ¾ of them women, as witches who had sworn loyalty to the devil.
Whereas the Catholic Church insisted that priests and nuns remain celibate (unmarried), the new Protestant churches permitted their clergy to marry. In a few radical Protestant sects, women sometimes became leaders in church organization and propagation. However, male clergy, both Catholic and Protestant, generally agreed that even though men and women are equal in the sight of God women should bow to the will of their fathers and husbands in religious and intellectual matters.
Religious differences shaped European divisions for the rest of the early modern era. Most of northwestern Europe, such as England, the Netherlands, the northern German lands, and Scandinavia, became Protestant, while most of southwestern Europe, such as France, Spain, the southern German lands, and Italy, remained loyal to Rome. Religious differences led to wars between Spain and England, the revolt of the Netherlands, the Huguenot civil wars in France, and the Thirty Years War in Germany, which ended in 1648. By that time, after 150 years of religious warfare, many Europeans were calling for religious toleration to bring an end to religious violence.
Students now turn to the question: How did world religions change and spread during the early modern period? The expansion of global communications facilitated the further expansion of major world religions, notably Christianity in the Americas and Southeast Asia, Islam around the Indian Ocean rim, and Theravada Buddhism from Sri Lanka to Southeast Asia. The Christian reformation played a significant role in motivating colonization of the Americas. European missionaries, especially Catholic missionary orders, spread reformed Christianity in Africa and Asia during the early modern period.
A new world religion, Sikhism, was founded in 1469 in South Asia. Sikhism was founded by Guru Nanak, a social reformer who challenged the authority of the Brahmins and the Hindu caste order. Students learn about the Sikh Scripture (Guru Granth Sahib), articles of faith, the turban, and Sikh history. Guru Nanak taught that all human beings are equal and can realize the divine within them without any human intermediaries or priests. Sikhs believe that each individual can realize the divine on his or her own through devotion to God, truthful living, and service to humanity. The three basic principles of Sikhism are honest living, sharing with the needy, and praying to one God. With the addition of Sikhism, there were now three major religions in India. While relations between people of different religions were often peaceful, some Mughul rulers, who were Muslims, persecuted Sikhs. Other Mughal rulers, most notably Akbar, encouraged and accelerated the blending of Hindu and Islamic beliefs as well as architectural and artistic forms.
Religious enthusiasm and challenge to orthodoxy in the early modern period was not unique to Europe. In China the philosopher Wang Yangming (1472-1529) initiated a reform of neo-Confucian teaching and practice, which he found dogmatic and snobbish. He argued that ordinary women and men have the capacity to lead honest lives and know good from evil without learning Confucian texts and performing ceremonies. In Iran, the Safavid Dynasty gave support to the Shi’a branch of Islam, thereby challenging Sunni authority. For another example of adoption and adaptation, students can analyze art and texts from Java to see how the journey of nine Sufi saints led to a synthesis of local animism, Hinduism and Islam. On a global scale, religious change in the early modern period tended to promote more personal forms of practice at the expense of the power of entrenched religious institutions and clerics. Religions continued to spread as people sought ways to understand the changes happening around them.
The teacher makes the transition to the question: What were the effects of the Renaissance and the Scientific Revolution? by telling students that they will be studying the development and spread of other sets of ideas besides religious ones. The Renaissance was a cultural and intellectual movement that began in the Italian city-states in the mid-fourteenth century and spread across Europe by the sixteenth century.
The Italian Peninsula witnessed significant urbanization and the formation of prosperous independent city-states such as Venice, Genoa, Florence and Milan. With wealth generated from trade and industry, and inspired by commercial and political rivalry with one another, these city-states experienced a remarkable burst of creativity that produced the artistic and literary advances of the Renaissance. Through extensive contact with Byzantine and Islamic scholars, a considerable body of Greco-Roman knowledge was rediscovered. This revival of classical learning was named humanism. Humanists studied history, moral philosophy, poetry, rhetoric, and grammar, subjects they thought should be the key elements of an enlightened education. Humanism facilitated considerable achievements in literature, such as the works of Dante Alighieri, Machiavelli, and William Shakespeare, and the arts, such the painting and sculpture of Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo di Buonarroti Simoni. Students investigate the Renaissance artistic techniques, such as perspective and realistic portraits, and architectural masterpieces, such as the Sistine Chapel. After 1455, the printing press, using moveable metal type, and the availability of manufactured paper disseminated humanism and Italian Renaissance learning to other parts of Europe and beyond. In Northern Europe, humanist interest in the origin and development of languages inspired the creation of new and more exacting Greek and Latin versions of the New Testament as well as vernacular translations of the Bible. This emphasis on exact reading of the Christian scriptures was an important influence upon early Protestant thinkers.
Humanism played a continuing role in advancing science, mathematics, and engineering techniques, as well as the understanding of human anatomy and astronomy. Discoveries led to a Scientific Revolution in early modern Europe. The long-term origins of the Scientific Revolution were rooted in the historical connections with Greco-Roman rationalism; Jewish, Christian, and Muslim science; and Renaissance humanism. European exploration and colonization in this period also stimulated a desire for intellectual understanding of the human and natural world. New information, new plants, and new animals from the Americas, which were not mentioned in the Bible nor by Aristotle and other ancient Greek authorities, led many to challenge traditional Christian and classical ideas about the universe. Scientists replaced reliance on classical authorities with the methodologies of the Scientific Revolution: empiricism, scientific observation, mathematical proof, and experimental science. They created what is today known as the scientific method. A number of significant inventions and instruments in over the 16th and 17th centuries—the telescope, microscope, thermometer, and barometer— furthered scientific knowledge and understanding. There were significant scientific theories in astronomy and physics, including those associated with Nicolaus Copernicus, Johannes Kepler, Sir Isaac Newton, and Galileo Galilei (a physicist and astronomer who was charged with heresy by the Catholic Church for his public support of Copernicus’ theory that the earth revolved around the sun; he spent his final days under house arrest).
By the eighteenth century, scientific thinking and rational thought in Europe were reconciled with religious ideas and practice, as scientists justified their studies as identifying the patterns of the natural world to discover the plan of the divine. Many people accepted the concept that the universe operates according to natural laws, which human reason can discover and explain. The development of a culture of scientific inquiry in Europe was associated with its autonomous universities in some countries. In these institutions scholars received some legal protection and were relatively free to study and argue what they pleased. Gradually, European scientific knowledge began to inform military, agricultural, and metallurgical technologies. By the early eighteenth century, this culture of scientific inquiry was diffused beyond Europe through the establishment of universities in Mexico, Peru, and North America. The teacher sets up a gallery walk of major inventions and discoveries of the Scientific Revolution and gives students a source analysis chart that includes the questions: What were the effects of the Scientific Revolution? What modern ideas or technologies came from this invention or discovery? When students have completed gallery walk, the teacher leads a discussion of the effects of the Scientific Revolution, and lists effects on the board as students identify them.
Newton’s recognition that nature was understandable, predictable, and bound by natural laws proved an important inspiration to Locke and other early thinkers associated with the Enlightenment who argued that such laws and understandings were applicable to the human and moral world as well. The Enlightenment emerged from the Scientific Revolution, and the political and social conditions of the 18th century. The students focus on the question: Why were the social contract and other ideas of the Enlightenment revolutionary? Beginning in the late seventeenth century, philosophers began to employ the use of reason and scientific methods to scrutinize previously accepted political and social doctrines. Enlightenment thinkers, such as John Locke, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Charles-Louis Montesquieu, and Thomas Jefferson, proposed religious toleration, equal rights of all before the law, and the Social Contract. The teacher focuses on the social contract, as it provides the necessary bridge to Grade 8. After explaining its three fundamental concepts, the teacher assigns a choice project: students can either write a story, draw a visual, or act out the three ideas of the social contract. Students work alone on stories or visuals, but form small groups for the acting option. The students can also engage in a service learning project that emphasizes the importance of the responsibility of citizens in a democracy. If the people are the basis of the state, then they must act to protect the state and other citizens, participate in state institutions, such as jury duty and voting, and help insure rights for all.
Grade Eight – United States History and Geography: Growth and Conflict
What did freedom mean to the nation’s founders and how did it change over time?
How and why did the United States expand?
Who is considered an American?
The eighth grade course of study begins with an intensive review of the major ideas, issues, and events that shaped the founding of the nation. In their study of this era, students will view American history through the lens of a people who were trying—and are still trying—to fulfill the promise of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. Throughout their eighth grade United States history and geography course, students will confront the themes of freedom, equality, and liberty and their changing definitions over time. This course will also explore the geography of place, movement, and region, starting with the Atlantic Seaboard and then exploring American westward expansion and economic development, the Civil War and Reconstruction, and finally, industrialization.  Covering parts of three centuries, the historical content outlined in this chapter is both substantial and substantive, which poses a significant challenge for teachers, with limited time for in-depth study. In order to address this challenge, this chapter is organized into four large sections that incorporate relevant questions that can help students understand how individual events and people comprise a larger narrative explanation of our past.
As students learn American history from the late 1700s through the end of the nineteenth century, they will develop reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills that will enhance their understanding of the content. As in earlier grades, students should be taught that history is an investigative discipline, one that is continually reshaped based on primary-source research and on new perspectives that can be uncovered. Students should be encouraged to read multiple primary and secondary documents; to understand multiple perspectives; to learn about how some things change over time and others tend not to; and they should appreciate that each historical era has its own context and it is up to the student of history to make sense of the past on these terms and by asking questions about it.

The Development of American Constitutional Democracy
Why was there an American Revolution?
How did the American Revolution develop the concept of natural rights?
What were the legacies of the American Revolution?
Roots of the American Revolution
This year’s study of American history begins with a selective review of how the nation was constructed, informed by what students remember from their fifth grade study of early American history, which included consideration of the colonial period, the American Revolution, and the early republic. Students can begin their eighth grade studies with a brief review of the significant developments of the colonial era; the creation of a colonial economy based on agriculture, commerce, and small-scale manufacturing; and the persistence of regional differences in the British North Atlantic Colonies.
Considering the question Why was there an American Revolution? guides students’ review of these years. Students can begin with a survey of the major events and ideas leading to the American War for Independence that they studied in fifth grade, by building an online timeline that includes basic descriptions of events as well as written analyses of each event’s significance. Students can consider, for example, the Great Awakening, which affected many Americans. In emotional sermons, ministers offered a more egalitarian relationship between believers and their God that appealed to many races and classes. Excerpts from primary source documents, such as sermons by George Whitefield and Jonathan Edwards, demonstrate for students how the Great Awakening influenced the development of revolutionary fervor and morality. Students also consider the impact of the Seven Years’ War, known in the colonies as the French and Indian War, on the colonists’ feelings toward the British crown. Prior to the war, American colonists lived in relative isolation from British soldiers and were generally content with British rule. After the war, the colonists became increasingly resentful of the continued presence of British troops (including soldiers who exhibited what some colonists considered to be coarse behavior)—a daily reminder of their mother colony in their homeland. The colonists were even more angry with the British government’s attempts to collect revenue from the colony to help pay for the war and the Crown’s prohibition against colonial expansion to the west. Students may want to investigate why, specifically, British actions were considered to be unreasonable by the colonists and how the imposition of British law came to be viewed as increasingly oppressive. Taken together, the continued presence of the British military and the imposition of new taxes fueled colonial resentment and helped establish the new American consciousness. This new American identity expanded further with the growth of more densely populated and diverse cities like Philadelphia and Boston where colonists started to notice how their economic, political, and even social interests with one another seemed more aligned than their interests with Great Britain. Men like Thomas Paine wrote down these developments, and soon organizations such as the Committees of Correspondence communicated them throughout the colonies.
Principles of the American Revolution
On July 4, 1776, delegates at the second Constitutional Convention signed the Declaration of Independence, officially asserting the colonies’ separation from Great Britain. Students might engage in activity in which they compare the preambles of the Declaration of Independence between the first and second (or final) drafts. Doing a close reading sentence deconstruction of this important preamble will highlight for students that the differences between the first and second drafts were intended to unify the colonies as one new nation in opposition to Great Britain. Students might also fully explore the grievances against Great Britain and they should trace the broad principle of natural rights threaded throughout it. They can consider the question: How did the American Revolution develop the concept of natural rights? Students can analyze what Thomas Jefferson meant when he wrote that “all men are created equal” and “endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights.” To deepen student understanding of these foundational arguments, teachers employ classroom debates and town hall meeting activities where students define and defend the arguments of the framers.
Once students understand the principles of the American Revolution as outlined in the Declaration of Independence, they briefly survey the major turning points in the war, its key leaders, people that fought in it, and how the war touched the lives of nearly everyone in the colonies.  They might trace the roles of key leaders in the war and explore how they went on to lead the new nation: George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, James Madison, and Alexander Hamilton. They can revisit their fifth-grade studies of how the principles of the American Revolution (especially natural rights of freedom and the opportunity for democracy) motivated African-Americans – both free and unfree – to try to secure them for all by their service in the war itself.
The American colonial struggle for independence occurred in a global context. The following questions can help students consider the perspectives of those that did not serve in either the Continental or British armies: How did Indians participate in the American Revolution? How did the alliances and treaties made by American Indians affect their relationships with both the Patriots and the British? How did American calls for independence inspire other nations, such as France and the French colony of Haiti? Students learn both about the significance that the American Revolution had for other nations and also the pivotal role played by other nations in affecting the course of the war.
Legacies of the American Revolution
With the American victory over the British, the new nation struggled to define how the principles upon which the Revolution was fought would become law and be applied to the new nation. The following question can frame students’ understanding of the aftermath of the Revolution: What were the legacies of the American Revolution? Students can learn that many historical documents and ideas influenced the Framers of the Constitution as they attempted to translate the Revolutionary principles to reality. For example, students may review the context by synthesizing the major ideas of the Enlightenment and the origins of constitutional and self-government in the Magna Carta, the English Bill of Rights of 1689, the Mayflower Compact, the Virginia House of Burgesses, and New England town hall meetings.
Students should also learn about the challenges and multiple attempts that it took to form a stable government; the Articles of Confederation, for example, taught leaders in America the importance of a centralized government. The Articles of Confederation were the first attempt to create a federal government for the thirteen autonomous states that had freed themselves from British rule. The Articles provided a governing structure for the United States during the Revolutionary War, but quickly proved to be inadequate for the needs of the new nation. The Articles, which were finally ratified by all thirteen states in 1781, enabled the new country to fight the Revolutionary War, negotiate with foreign powers, and expand to the west. However, the Articles established a weak central government, one that lacked an executive branch and a national judiciary.  Under the Articles, Congress also couldn’t regulate commerce or even force the individual states to contribute to the national treasury. Given the absence of a strong central government and as a result, its inability to respond to domestic crises, such as Shays’ Rebellion in Massachusetts, and enforce a coherent and united foreign policy, national leaders began to call for a new governmental structure. Because of their experience, the Framers aimed to create a government that was neither too strong (because it might turn into despotism, or at the very least look too similar to the British monarchy) or too weak (as the Articles of Confederation proved to be).
In order to understand the process by which the Constitution was created through speeches, discussions, debate, and drafting, students can read a number of different documents and engage in a variety of activities to bring these important conventions to life. For one, students can study the men who attended the Constitutional Conventions. They can select one Framer to study in depth. As part of the study, students can be assigned a biography and/or they can identify two or three primary sources produced by him; collect evidence from the sources; chart information about his background, education, wealth, and values that he brought to the convention; and make claims about how his background influenced the positions he would take at the Constitutional Conventions. In addition to learning about the Constitutional Convention through the eyes of the Framers, students can read, discuss, and analyze excerpts from the document written at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia. Students should consider topics that divided the Founding Fathers and examine compromises they adopted to produce a unifying document. Several compromises preserved the institution of slavery, namely, the three-fifths rule of representation, the slave importation clause, and the fugitive slave clause. Students can explore quantitative information about where slaves lived and the work they did to determine: why were slave-holding provisions so important to southern delegates? Students can also wrestle with a question faced by some Founding Fathers: How could the nation’s ideals of freedom, liberty, and democracy be adopted alongside slavery? With careful guidance from the teacher, students can speculate about: what were the long-term costs of slavery, both to people of African descent and to the nation at large? In addition, students discuss the status of women in this era, particularly with regards to voting and the ownership of property. While political rights for women were not advocated by Founding Fathers, some women, such as Abigail Adams, wrote explicitly about how women’s interests, especially as mothers, needed to be considered by male leaders.
Beyond learning about the process by which the Constitution was created, students recognize the great achievements of the Constitution: (1) it created a republican form of government based on the consent of the governed—a bold new experiment; and (2) it established a government that has survived more than 200 years by a delicate balancing of power and interests through a system of checks and balances based on the separation of powers into three branches of government, and a Bill of Rights designed to protect individual liberties from federal government overreach; and (3) it provided an amendment process to adapt the Constitution to the needs of a changing society. Students study how the Constitution provided for the participation of citizens in the political process. However, teachers should also place special emphasis on who was actually allowed to participate during this period in United States history. Explaining the role of property ownership in voter and office-holding requirements can familiarize students with the limits of republican government during this period and foreshadow efforts to expand citizenship rights in the years to come. Websites such as icivics.org, constitutioncenter.org, or congress.gov contain activities, games, and film clips that appropriately describe the enduring significance of the Constitution and the law-making process.
In addition to their examination of the Constitution itself, students consider the civil liberties outlined in the Bill of Rights, by analyzing both the historical context for their inclusion as well as current implications of their adoption. As Thomas Jefferson noted in a letter to James Madison in 1787, "[A] bill of rights is what the people are entitled to against every government on earth, general or particular, and what no just government should refuse." Students first consider why the Bill of Rights were added to the Constitution, studying the debate between the Federalists (who believed the protections were already included in the Constitution itself), and the Anti-Federalists (who opposed ratification of the Constitution without inclusion of a specific list of guaranteed protections of individual rights). Students then study the impact of the colonial experience on the drafting of the Bill of Rights in order to understand why these freedoms were so important to citizens of the new republic, from its broad emphasis on religious and political freedom, to more specific protections, such as the prohibition against quartering of troops. Finally, students consider how these liberties have come to be defined in practice over time, starting with Marbury v. Madison’s establishment of the judiciary’s role in their protection, and in more current decisions on a variety of topics that reinforce student understanding of the individual rights, engage them in topics of real interest, and deepen their appreciation for the Bill of Rights’ relevance in modern day.

Envisioning a New America
How much power should the federal government have and what should it do?
What was life like in the Early Republic?
Was the Louisiana Purchase Constitutional?
How did the government change during the Early Republic?
In this unit students consider the people, events, and ideas that shaped America between the ratification of the Constitution in 1788 and into the early 1800s. The new nation’s leaders like Washington, Adams, Jefferson, Madison, and Hamilton faced enormous challenges in trying to determine the political structure of the country. John Adams, for example, argued that, “Our Constitution was made only for a moral and religious people,” a sentiment echoed in George Washington’s “Farewell Address.” The conflicts between two views of how the newly independent country should move forward, articulated most vocally and explicitly by the ideological adversaries Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson, resulted in the emergence of a two-party system (Federalists and Democratic –Republicans, respectively). These two parties had differing views on foreign policy, economic policy (the National Bank and infrastructure such as canals, roads, and land grants for education), and the interpretation of the Constitution. Students can analyze these different perspectives by considering, How much power should the federal government have and what should it do?
An in-depth comparison of both Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton can offer students insight into the administration of our first president, George Washington, demonstrate that success in this new republic was not at all assured, give insight into the development of a two-party system, and provide a better understanding of a fundamental tension that continues to influence American politics. Washington selected both Jefferson and Hamilton as members of his original cabinet; Jefferson as the first Secretary of State and Hamilton as Secretary of the Treasury. While both were dedicated to the success of his administration and the country itself, they often advised our first president to ignore the counsel of each other and became personal adversaries, as in 1792, when Jefferson told Washington that Hamilton’s allies in Congress were a “corrupt squadron,” whose “ultimate object … is to prepare the way for a change, from the present republican form of government, to that of a monarchy, of which the English constitution is to be the model.” (NARA). Through a careful examination of selected sentences from a variety of primary sources, such as Jefferson’s letter to Washington, Alexander Hamilton’s Report on the Public Credit (the sentence that begins with “To justify and preserve their confidence…” is most helpful in communicating his central claim), or Thomas Jefferson’s The Kentucky Resolutions which condemned the excess of the Alien and Sedition Acts (the sentence that begins with “Resolved, that the several states composing the United States of America, are not united on the principle of unlimited submission…” is most helpful in communicating his central claim), or Hamilton’s notes for a speech proposing a plan of government at the Federal Convention  of June 1787 (the section that starts with, “The general government must, in this case, not only have a strong soul, but strong organs by which that soul is to operate….” (NARA) makes a strong argument), students can begin to make sense of this complicated debate about the role of government, while at the same time gaining insight into a very nasty and public personal feud between the two founders. To support student comprehension of these difficult and dense primary source texts, teachers will need to employ a variety of literacy support strategies, such as strategies designed to: define unfamiliar vocabulary within context, identify the thesis of a written argument, and evaluate evidence in support of a claim. The inclusion of relevant secondary or text will likely support this effort.  These debates provide early context for the meaning of federalism and help students address the question: How did the government change during the Early Republic?
Using shadow outlines of Hamilton and Jefferson’s profiles, students can design a “historical head” to distinguish between the two founders’ perspectives on the role of the government – how Jefferson prioritized the needs of the agrarian economy while Hamilton promoted commerce and manufacturing, for example. These “historical heads” can also illuminate differences of opinion on the strength of the federal government, as compared to state and local governments, the protection of individual rights, the establishment of a national bank and what to do about public debt, and later support for infrastructure development, such as canals, roads, and land for schools. (“Historical head” strategy adapted from California History-Social Science Project, University of California, Davis.)
In addition to these internal divisions within the government, the United States had to confront more fundamental challenges to its authority and legitimacy such as Shays’ Rebellion and the Whiskey Rebellion. Many leaders in the new nation also felt they had to demonstrate the nation’s viability on the international stage, and in 1812 it fought an unpopular war with Great Britain and confirmed U.S. sovereignty.
Students can also learn about the ideals and aspirations of the people of the Early American Republic through a lens of demand for natural resources, a context for understanding the country’s physical landscapes, political divisions, and the resulting pressures which led to territorial expansion. This approach challenges them to consider the complications involved in westward expansion and begin to recognize many consequences of that growth (California Environmental Principle II). They learn what happens as the country doubled in size at the same time the new nation was struggling with issues of debt and, simultaneously, political control of what appeared to many as nearly limitless natural resources. (See EEI Curriculum Unit Land, Politics, and Expansion in the Early Republic 8.4.1) The United States paid $15 million to France for the purchase of the Louisiana territory. Students explore the constitutionality of this action, noting that even Jefferson himself argued that, “The General Government has no powers but such as the Constitution gives it… it has not given it power of holding foreign territory, and still less of incorporating it into the Union.  An amendment of the Constitution seems necessary for this.” Students can relate this back to a debate over strict versus loose construction interpretation of the Constitution as they consider the question, Was the Louisiana Purchase Constitutional?
Territorial expansion and its consequences proved to be an ongoing source of conflict and debate for the new nation. The passage of the Northwest Ordinance set up a process for adding new states to the country and placed a limit on the spread of slavery, but this expansion also brought Americans into increased conflict with American Indian nations. While the Ordinance stated that, “The utmost good faith shall always be observed towards the Indians,” students learn that the reality was often very different.
Students can discuss the belief of the nation’s founders that the survival of a republican government depends on an educated people. They analyze the connection between education and republican ideals symbolized in the Northwest Ordinance and in Jefferson’ dictum, “If a nation expects to be ignorant and free, in a state of civilization, it expects what never was and never will be.” Students may survey the types of education received in church schools, dame schools, and at home. Preparing editorials for period newspapers, classroom debates, and classroom speeches encourages students to consider the variety of educational systems in a democratic republic.
Students also examine the economic and social lives of ordinary people in the new nation, including farmers, merchants, laborers, and traders; women; African Americans, both slave and free; and American Indians. Reading excerpts from works by James Fenimore Cooper, Washington Irving, Olaudah Equiano, and Abigail Adams. In addition, studying the writing, music, and art of this era will help bring this period alive and establish the origins of American identity.  Surveying the evolution of the educational system and the lives of ordinary people prepares students to answer this question: What was life like in the Early Republic?

The Divergent Paths of the American People: 1800–1850
How did individual regions of the United States become both more similar and more different?
What was family life like in each region?
How did work change between 1800 and 1850?
What was the impact of slavery on American politics, regional economies, family life, and culture? What did the frontier mean to the nation in the first half of the nineteenth century?
This unit explores the nation’s regional development in the Northeast, South, and West. Each region encompassed a distinct geography, economic focus, and demographic composition. Students can compare the regions in terms of commercial development, sources of wealth, natural resources, political agendas, infrastructure, population density, and eventually slavery, including the debate over the free soil movement. However, the growth of the market economy and the faster movement of people, commerce, and information increasingly connected each region of the nation to the others. Thus, although the regions appeared to be developing separate characteristics, in fact the nation was becoming increasingly inter-dependent and connected in the first half of the nineteenth century.
The inter-connectedness was made possible by the market revolution, which is a term developed by historians to describe the transition in economic systems from a pre-industrial subsistence economy to a market-oriented society that made capitalism a part of people’s daily lives. As an umbrella term, the market revolution describes not just the important economic changes, but the technological and transportation changes that affected politics and society. It made possible advances in transportation like turnpikes, steamboats, canals, and railroads. And it allowed for significance advances in communication through the telegraph, which allowed for more widespread availability of newspapers.
Eventually, the market revolution led to debates over the role that the government should play in supporting these advances; through controversial land subsidies and financing of projects the government became more involved in creating a national infrastructure as the nineteenth century progressed.  In the years to come these debates would become more pointed, as some Americans argued for increasing government involvement and expenditure to support the common good while others advocated a more limited role for the government and greater emphasis upon individual effort.
Throughout this regional study students should be encouraged to view historical events empathetically as though they were there, working in places such as mines, cotton fields, and mills. Historical empathy will support students as they work to address broad questions of historical significance including: How did individual regions of the United States become both more similar and more different?
The Northeast. The industrial revolution in the Northeast affected the structure of life inside the region, but it also had important consequences for the nation as a whole. As the family economy gave way to industrial production, the roles of women and men changed. Middle-class women devoted themselves to the home and family, while men went out to work. An ideology of separate spheres conceptualized women and men as fundamentally different. As a result, men and women formed close bonds with one another inside their separate spheres, while at the same time were also expected to marry and raise a family. Students should engage with the question: What was family life like in the Northeast? This question encourages students to consider change over time, cause and effect, and historical context in developing a well-reasoned answer.
Inventions between 1790 and 1850 transformed manufacturing, transportation, mining, communications, agriculture, and the economy, and profoundly affected how people lived and worked. Industrialization, an umbrella term that describes all of the changes listed above, touched nearly every component of American life. Mechanized production in shops, mills, and factories replaced skilled craftspersons, a process depicted by Charles Dickens in his American Notes and in the letters written by young women who left home to work in the mills of Lowell, Massachusetts. These women organized strikes and labor organizations to petition against wage cuts and appealed to the state legislature for shorter hours. Teachers may use historical fiction, such as Lyddie by Katherine Paterson, to illustrate the working lives of mill women and to help address this question: How did work change in the first half of the nineteenth century? This was a period of dramatic urbanization, as immigrants flocked to the cities, drawn by the “pull” factor of economic opportunity. The Great Irish Famine can be studied as an example of a “push” factor that affected the flow of immigrants to the United States. At the same time, the small African American population in the Northeast moved toward freedom, as the American Revolution initiated a long process of emancipation and indenture in this region. African Americans continued to occupy circumscribed social, economic, and political positions but created institutions to advance their rights and develop their communities, such as the African Methodist Episcopal Church founded by Richard Allen, Absalom Jones, and others in 1816.
Periods of boom and bust created both progress and poverty. In response to the strains brought about by rapid industrialization, an age of reform began that attempted to make life more bearable for the less fortunate and expanded opportunities for many. Students explore the significance of Charles Finney as the most famous leader of the Second Great Awakening, inspiring religious zeal, social reforms, such as equal education for women and African Americans, and eventually, support for the abolitionist movement. As more Americans grew concerned about people who were considered to be “downtrodden,” they turned their reform impulses from churches and philanthropies to other sectors of society. Students can explore campaigns to reform hospitals, mental institutions, and prisons by studying the reformers, those considered in need of reform, and the methods by which reform was initiated. To make this topic more personal, students can study the work of Dorothea Dix and consider the following question that addresses change over time and causality: How did Americans help people in need? Other impulses for reform may be found in transcendentalism and individualism, as represented by the writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, Herman Melville, Louisa May Alcott, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
In addition to learning about reform through philosophy, health, and religion, students can learn about nineteenth-century reform through education. Students can study what life was like for young people in the 1830s in order to appreciate Horace Mann’s crusade for free public education for all, as well as the argument for public investment in education, both in the 19th century and today.
Grade Eight Classroom Example: The Civic Purpose of Public Education
In Mr. Lopez’s 8th-grade history class, students read and analyze excerpts from primary-source documents explaining the social and civic purposes of public education. Mr. Lopez begins the class by explaining to students that they will consider the question: Why go to school? As a brief opening activity, Mr. Lopez asks students to discuss their personal answers to this first question, and then to attempt to address it for people in the nineteenth century. As students complete the activity, Mr. Lopez charts on the board many of the common answers including but not limited to: literacy, economic benefits, to get an informed electorate, and childcare.
Next, Mr. Lopez introduces the idea of compulsory education in the nineteenth century by showing them examples of typical schoolbooks from the era. He highlights elocution exercises, moral lessons, and orations (for example, The Columbian Orator). He also provides students with an explanation of Why go to school? from two leading nineteenth-century intellectuals: Benjamin Rush and Catherine Beecher. Using selected sentences from Rush’s “Of the Mode of Education Proper in a Republic,” and Beecher’s A Treatise on Domestic Economy (chapter 1), students consider two radically different answers to the question. Working in pairs for a few minutes in preparation for a whole class discussion, the class charts similarities and differences between the justifications for education of the nineteenth century and more recent educational systems. They also discuss the perspectives of both authors by considering their personal background, the purpose of the document itself, and its intended audience. Although short, these excerpts are dense and filled with archaic language. To ensure student comprehension, Mr. Lopez works carefully with his students to help them understand how common terms can often have multiple meanings. For example, he has student groups look up the multiple meanings of the word “interest” and then displays the following excerpt from the Beecher reading on the elmo: “The proper education of a man decides the welfare of an individual; but educate a woman, and the interests of the whole family are secured.” Mr. Lopez then asks each student group the meaning they believe best fits with the context of the sentence. After all the groups report and explain their reasoning, Mr. Lopez reveals/confirms the correct meaning for this context. Next he distributes a reference analysis chart which pinpoints the subtle references to religion and philosophy in the two documents. He uses a Think-Pair-Share to work through the chart with students. Finally he models for students a breakdown of the rhetorical structure that Rush uses to make his argument. He has student groups break down Beecher’s rhetorical structure with the help of a graphic organizer tailored to the chosen excerpt.
Mr. Lopez then asks students to discuss the following question in pairs, using evidence from the chart: Why did Benjamin Rush believe it was important to go to school? Why did Catherine Beecher believe it was important to go to school? How did their individual perspective affect their answers? As students discuss, Mr. Lopez circulates throughout the discussion to make sure that students’ answers are supported by relevant evidence and encourages them to think about how this answer might be similar or different if it was answered today.
As a culminating activity, Mr. Lopez asks students to assume the perspective of one of the two 19th century authors in order to write a short critique of the other.  Students then use their discussion notes to explain (in a few paragraphs) how their selected author’s views align with and differ from the other, all in response to the question: Why Go to School?
CA HSS Standards: 8.6.5
CA HSS Analysis Skills (6–8): Research, Evidence, and Point of View 5
CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.6–8.1, 2 ,4, 6, WHST.6–8.1, 7, 9, SL.8.1, L.8.4a
CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.8.1, 6a, 8, 11a

Out of these far-reaching reform movements of the nineteenth century, Americans became increasingly interested in discussing the status of women. Students can begin with a brief review the legal and economic status of women and learn about the major impetus given to the woman’s rights movement by leaders such as Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. They should read and discuss the Seneca Falls Declaration of Sentiments and compare it with the Declaration of Independence by revisiting the important question: What did freedom mean and how did it change over time? Noting the intersections between previously-studied reform movements, the woman’s rights movement and the abolitionist movement, students can study the efforts of educators such as Catharine Beecher, Emma Willard and Mary Lyon to establish schools and colleges for women. Students may examine the relationship of these events to contemporary issues by considering the question: Why do periods of reform arise at certain historical moments?
As a link to the next region of study, students can explore the interdependence between the slave South and the industrial North. During the American Revolution, northern states had begun a slow process of emancipation while their southern counterparts, with the invention of the cotton gin, became increasingly tied to a slave-based economy. Eli Whitney, a teacher and tinkerer from New England and educated at Yale, was working on a Georgia plantation when he invented his famous machine that increased the productivity of slave labor. Despite the fact that slavery was by and large a Southern institution, Northern and Western business leaders and national economic institutions continued to derive their own wealth from the nation’s use of slavery to extract raw materials.
Slave labor produced the cotton and raw materials which enabled northern factories and businesses to thrive. This, in turn, spurred a new consumer culture in individual families, connected to the slave-based economy. These topics can help students address the question: How did the country become more connected in the first half of the nineteenth century?
The South. During these years, the South diverged dramatically from the Northeast and the West. Its plantation economy depended on a system of slave labor to harvest such cash crops as cotton, rice, sugarcane, and tobacco. The invention of the cotton gin allowed for a dramatic expansion of plantation agriculture across the region. African-American slavery, the “peculiar institution” of the South, had marked effects on the region’s political, social, economic, and cultural development. Increasingly at odds with the rest of the nation, the South was unable to share in the popularity of democratic politics of the Jacksonian era or in the reform campaigns of the 1840s. Its system of public education lagged far behind the rest of the nation.
Students learn about the institution of slavery in the South in its historical context. They review their seventh-grade studies of West African civilizations before the coming of the Europeans and compare the American system of chattel slavery, which considered people as property, with slavery in other societies. 
Students discuss the role that race and gender played in constructing the enslaved as in need of civilization and thereby rationalizing slavery; the daily lives of enslaved men and women on plantations and small farms, including the varied family structures they adopted; the economic and social realities of slave auctions that led to the separation of nuclear families and encouraged broad kinship bonds; the centrality of sexual violence to the system of slavery; and the myriad laws: from the outlawing of literacy to restrictions on freedom gained through emancipation or purchase that marked the lives of American slaves. Amidst the confining world of slavery, the enslaved asserted their humanity in developing a distinct African-American culture through retaining and adapting their traditional customs on American soil. This culture included less restrictive norms around gender and sexuality that supported the formation of alternative family structures within enslaved communities. Students can connect this information about the slave society by considering the question: What were slaves lives like? How did slave families live in ways that were similar to and different from non-slave families? While organized revolt was rare, in informal and individual ways, enslaved men and women resisted their bondage. Breaking tools, working slowly, feigning illness, and even learning to read and write represented skirmishes in an unacknowledged conflict between the enslaved and the enslaver. When armed revolts were uncovered (Gabriel Prosser in 1800 and Denmark Vesey in 1822) or manifested (the Stono Rebellion in 1739 and Nat Turner in 1831), white Southerners punished the individual perpetrators and often passed more severe laws. Students explore the effects of slave revolt and rebellion upon local and state legislation and relations between enslaved African Americans and free white Southerners.
To provide a more comprehensive understanding of the antebellum South, students study the lives of plantation owners and other white Southerners; the more than 100,000 free African Americans in the South; as well as the laws, such as the fugitive slave laws of 1793 and 1850, that curbed their freedom and economic opportunity. Students also compare the situations of free African Americans in the South and in the North and note that freedom from slavery did not necessarily lead to acceptance and equality. 
Students examine the national abolitionist movement that arose during the nineteenth century. While the abolition movement is quite popular with students seeking to connect these early activists to rights-movements of the next century, it is extremely important that students learn about abolitionists in their own contexts. Abolitionists were considered the most radical reformists by both southerners and northerners; their arguments about the immorality of slavery were never popular with the vast majority of Americans. Only by studying remarkable abolitionists like Thomas Weld, William Lloyd Garrison, Angelina and Sarah Grimke, Wendell Phillips, and John Brown, in this context, can students begin to understand the historical context of slavery. Despite repeated threats, attacks, and bounties on their heads, abolitionists wrote news articles and editorials, spoke publicly, boycotted slave-made goods, housed fugitive slaves, and, in the case of John Brown, planned armed conflict. African Americans, free and enslaved, also actively challenged the existence of slavery, both as individuals and through the founding of fraternal organizations, churches, and newspapers. African American abolitionists, including Frederick Douglass, Sojourner Truth, Harriett Jacobs, Charles Remond, Harriet Tubman, and Robert Purvis risked their lives to speak at public gatherings, pen news articles, petition Congress, and assist in the underground movement to help rescue escaping slaves. Excerpts from Frederick Douglass’s What the Black Man Wants, David Walker’s Appeal, Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin, and Fanny Kemble’s Journal of Residence on a Georgia Plantation, as well as excerpts from slave narratives and abolitionist tracts of this period, will bring these people and events alive for students and enable them to address questions like: How did people work to end slavery and what opposition did they face?
Grade Eight Classroom Example: The Anti-Slavery Movement
(Integrated ELD in U.S. History–Social Science)
In history class, students are learning about the origins of slavery in the U.S., its consequences, and its abolition. They learn how Frederick Douglass, an African-American writer and political activist who was born a slave in 1818, escaped to freedom and began to promote the anti-slavery cause in the nineteenth century. Throughout the 1840s and 1850s he traveled across the north delivering abolitionist lectures, writing anti-slavery articles, and publishing his autobiography about his time in slavery and in freedom.
In 1855, Douglass gave a speech to the Rochester Ladies’ Anti-Slavery Society. Mrs. Wilson, the history teacher, has carefully excerpted significant selections from Douglass’s speech as well as other relevant primary sources in order to help her students understand the abolitionist argument in the years leading up to the Civil War and to answer the following focus question: Why did Frederick Douglass believe the United States should abolish slavery? Mr. Lopez, the school’s ELD specialist, has consulted with Mrs. Wilson to help students understand Douglass’s writing, which contains challenging vocabulary, complicated organization, and abstract ideas. The following quotation from Douglass’s speech in Rochester is characteristic of the language students will encounter:
The slave is bound to mankind, by the powerful and inextricable network of human brotherhood. His voice is the voice of a man, and his cry is the cry of a man in distress, and a man must cease to be a man before he can become insensible to that cry. It is the righteousness of the cause—the humanity of the cause—which constitutes its potency.
Recognizing that their EL students, who are all at the Bridging level of English language proficiency, need support in understanding this complex language in order to develop sophisticated understandings of the content, for designated ELD time, Mrs. Wilson and Mr. Lopez collaboratively design lessons to meet these needs. They also recognize that the other students in the history class, many of whom are former ELs and standard English learners, would benefit from strategic attention to language analysis. The teachers decide to co-teach a series of integrated ELD lessons for the whole history class. They distribute copies of the quoted passage and read the excerpt aloud while students read along.
Next, Mr. Lopez asks the students to work in pairs to identify words or phrases in the short passage that are unfamiliar, abstract, or confusing. He has anticipated what some of these words will be (e.g., inextricable, potency) and has prepared student-friendly explanations in advance. After about a minute, he pulls the class together, charts the words the class identified, and offers brief explanations, which the students note in the margins of their individual copies. Since some of the words are cognates in Spanish, and many of the students are bilingual in Spanish- English bilinguals, he calls their attention to those words and provides the Spanish cognate. He also clarifies that the male pronouns man and men in the excerpt are meant to represent  all of humanity, not just the males.
Mrs. Wilson and Mr. Lopez then guide the students through a detailed sentence deconstruction activity, in which they model how to code words and phrases according to  how they function to make meaning in the sentences. In particular, the teachers encourage students to clearly identify words that serve as reference devices—substitutes and pronouns that refer to people, concepts, and events in other parts of the excerpt or in their previous discussions about the Antebellum era. After modeling and explaining how to conduct this type of analysis on a different chunk of text, the teachers ask students to work in pairs to practice doing the same analysis on the excerpt from Douglass’s speech at Rochester. An example of the whole group debrief, following their pair work:
Text:
Analysis:
What do the bolded terms in the text refer to?
The slave is bound to 
mankind, by the powerful and inextricable network of human brotherhood.
-men and women in slavery 
-all people, humanity
His voice is the voice of 
a man,
-the slave’s voice
-all people, humanity
and his cry is the cry of 
a man in distress,
-the slave’s cry or call for help
-man and mankind—all people, humanity in distress
and a man must cease to be a man before he can become insensible to that cry
-slave owners or people who support/don’t fight against slavery
-the cry of the slave in distress, but also all people in distress
It is the righteousness of the cause—the humanity of the cause—
-linking the righteousness and humanity of the cause with how powerful it is (potency)
-the cause is the abolition of slavery
-the righteousness and humanity of the cause is what makes it or causes it to be powerful
which constitutes its potency.
-the power or potency of the cause (abolition of slavery)

As Mr. Lopez leads the class to complete the chart together, drawing from the similar charts they completed in pairs, he asks students to suggest where he should draw arrows to connect the referring words to their antecedents. Throughout this discussion, there is considerable negotiating as students grapple with the meanings in the text and attempt to persuade their peers about their interpretations of those meanings. During the discussion about the text, Mr. Lopez prompts students to provide evidence to support their claims. In addition to unpacking the literal meanings of words and phrases, Mr. Lopez asks  students to discuss in triads the following question:
“Why did Douglass repeatedly use the word 'the man' to describe slave men and women?"
After lively small group discussions and then a whole group debrief, students are encouraged to develop their own interpretations using evidence from the text as well as their previous study of the Antebellum era. Some students believe that Douglass wanted to remind the white ruling class that men and women in bondage were human and hoped to connect the suffering of slaves to humanity’s struggles. Others suggest that Douglass was using the same rhetorical tool as the founding fathers, who often used the term, man to encompass everyone. Other students argue that since women did not have the same rights as men in 1855, Douglass focused his appeal on male citizens – those who could vote and make laws.  During the whole group discussion, Mrs. Wilson and Mr. Lopez pose questions to help students fully grasp Douglass’ use of imagery (e.g., a man in distress, his cry) as a tool for persuading his listeners. The class then deconstructs other sections of the text in order to develop even more nuanced understandings of Douglass’ writing and ideas. After examining a few other excerpts from the speech, the teachers ask the students to discuss and then write about the focus question: 
Why did Frederick Douglass believe the United States should abolish slavery?
Mr. Lopez and Mrs. Wilson find that having students grapple simultaneously with basic comprehension of short excerpts and larger questions about Douglass’s intent supports deeper understandings about the social significance of Douglass’s speech and provides students with strategies approaching other complex informational and historical texts.
Sources and Resources:
Example adapted from The California History-Social Science Project, University of California, Davis.
Primary Source: Douglass, Frederick. “The Anti-Slavery Movement.” Rochester Ladies’ Anti-Slavery Society. Rochester, New York, 1855. Rochester, New York: Lee, Mann and Co., Rochester, NY. Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript / Mixed Material Division, http://www.loc.gov/item/mfd000384.
CA HSS Content Standards: 8.7.2, 8.9, 8.9.1, 2, 4, 6
CA HSS Analysis Skills (6–8): Research, Evidence, and Point of View 5, Historical Interpretation 1
CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.6–8.1, 2, 4, 6, 8-10
CA ELD Standards (Bridging): ELD.PI.8.1, 6a, 6b, 8, 11a; ELD.PII.8.2a

The West. The West, whose boundaries, margins, and center shifted rapidly and dramatically during this period, deeply influenced the politics, economy, mores, and culture of the nation. It opened domestic markets for seaboard merchants; it offered new frontiers for immigrants and discontented Easterners; it allowed significant alterations in gender norms; and it inspired a folklore of individualism and rugged frontier life that has dramatically influenced our national self-image and sense of the American past. Students should continue to grapple with questions of regional identity like: What did the frontier mean to the nation? How did the nation’s regions develop similarly and differently in the first half of the twentieth century? How did family life develop in each region? The West was a changing region over this period as the country expanded, from the territory opened by the Northwest Ordinance, to the vast lands of the Louisiana Purchase, to the southwestern territories taken from Mexico. The peoples of the West reflected the diversity of the region: American Indians, Mexicans, Asians, and American emigrants and immigrants of various racial and ethnic backgrounds. As Americans moved west, they interacted with established societies, both indigenous and those created by earlier colonizers. Students study how the term the “frontier” affected American settlement and development in the West.
The election of Andrew Jackson in 1828 reflected the steady expansion of white male suffrage, symbolized the shift of political power to the West, and opened a new era of political democracy in the United States. President Jackson was a symbol of his age. Jacksonian Democracy should be analyzed in terms of its supporters—farmers with small holdings, artisans, laborers, and middle-class businessmen. It should also be looked at for its limitations. As an example, Andrew Jackson was a slave holder and also pressed for the removal of Native Americans, even disregarding a Supreme Court decision on the matter (Johnson v. M’Intosh, 1823). In studying Jackson’s presidency, students consider his spoils system, veto of the National Bank, policy of Indian removal, and opposition to the Supreme Court. Students can consider the question: How did Andrew Jackson change the country? Students may also consider Andrew Jackson’s legacy in order to evaluate his reputation as a hero for common people. During this time, Alexis de Tocqueville, a French nobleman, visited the United States to identify the general principles of American democracy. Students can compare his description of national character in the 1830s as recorded in Democracy in America with American life during the Revolution or with today.
Students review the story of the acquisition, exploration, and settlement of the trans-Mississippi West, from the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 to the admission of California as a state in 1850. This was a period marked by a strong spirit of nationalism, as Americans moved westward in search of economic opportunity, abundant natural resources, and for some, religious freedom. The success and speed with which the young nation expanded westward contributed to the perspective that Americans had a special purpose and divine right to populate the North American continent. This idea became known as “manifest destiny” and inspired an imperial ideology that infused American attitudes of racial and political superiority towards American Indians and the Republic of Mexico. Students can consider the question: How did Manifest Destiny contribute to American expansion? To deepen their understanding of the changing political geography and settlement of this immense land, students might read from the journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition to the Northwest; they could map the explorations of trailblazers such as Zebulon Pike, Jedediah Smith, Christopher “Kit” Carson, and John C. Fremont; they might discuss the searing accounts of the removal of Indians and the Cherokees’ “Trail of Tears”; and they could interpret maps and documents relating to the long sea voyages including around the horn of South America and overland treks that opened the West. Teachers include discussions about the role of the great rivers, the struggles over water rights in the development of the West, and the effect of geography on shaping the different ways that people settled and developed western regions. Students learn that as settlers began their westward journey in the 19th century, water played a vital role in determining the location of settlements. They can participate in a role playing activity to explore the influence of rivers on development and settlement patterns, and discover that the management of this essential resource took on a different form than in the eastern states where supplies were adequate to meet demand. Students recognize that the limited availability of water in the West underscored many political, legal, and economic decisions about water management (California Environmental Principle V, EEI Curriculum Unit Struggles with Water 8.8.4).
Grade Eight Classroom Example: Western Expansion
Ms. Ramsberg encourages her students to examine multiple perspectives as they study change over time in the settlement of the American West. One class activity that deepens student understanding of the ways that Americans discussed westward expansion is through consideration of this question: How did leading American thinkers (such as artists, intellectuals, religious and government leaders) justify America’s westward expansion in the 19th century? Ms. Ramsberg explains to her students that this activity is more about how people thought about their country, than it is about how the country itself looked.  She tells students that they will examine several primary sources to have access to a variety of perspectives on this question: 1) a letter from John Quincy Adams to his father, John Adams, in 1811 (both Adamses served as US Presidents); 2) an excerpt from columnist John O’Sullivan’s essay “Annexation,” which advocated for Texas’ admission into the Union; 3) a copy of American Progress, an 1872 painting by John Gast, who was hired to create the painting by George Crofutt, a publisher of western travel guides; 4) an excerpt from “The Significance of the Frontier of American History” by historian Frederick Jackson Turner; 5) an excerpt from Our Country: Its Possible Future and Its Present Crisis by Josiah Strong, a Congregational Minister.
As students read each document, they collect evidence and supporting details about how the source advocates for western expansion. Ms. Ramsberg supports student reading comprehension through a variety of literacy-building strategies, including graphic organizers and sentence deconstruction charts to help students understand O’Sullivan’s use of reference devices, abstract claims, and causal relationships.  Students then compare American Progress to a selected excerpt from the Turner argument to practice historical corroboration, and finally give a short oral argument in response to the lesson’s question, using evidence collected from the primary sources.
Source: Excerpted from Western Expansion - Curriculum to support California’s implementation of the Common Core and English Language Development Standards. California History-Social Science Project. Copyright © 2014, Regents of the University of California, Davis Campus.
CA HSS Content Standards: 8.8.2
CA HSS Analysis Skills (6–8): Research, Evidence, and Point of View 4, 5
CA CCSS for ELA/Literacy: RH.6–8.1, 2, 6, 8, 9, SL.8.4, L.8.6 
CA ELD Standards: ELD.PI.8.1, 6a, 6b, 7, 9, 11; ELD.PII.8.1

In addition to learning about the political, economic, and ideological justifications for western expansion, students study the northward movement of settlers from Mexico into the Southwest, with emphasis on the location of Mexican settlements, their cultural traditions, their attitudes toward slavery, their land-grant system, and the economy they established. Students need this background before they can analyze the events that followed the arrival of westward-moving settlers from the East into these Mexican territories. Students explore the settlement of Americans in northern Mexico and their actions to establish the Republic of Texas. Teachers provide special attention to the causes and consequences of the United States’ War with Mexico by considering the question, What were the consequences of the Mexican American War? To answer this question, students study early territorial settlements, the political ambitions of James K. Polk and other pro-slavery politicians, and the war’s aftermath on the lives of the Mexican families who first lived in the region. Students also study the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and the California Constitution of 1849 and their effects on the lives of Mexicans living within the new United States borders.
Frontier life had a mixed effect on the relations between men and women. White men far outnumbered white women, creating some opportunities where the latter became more valued than previously; they were thus able to achieve some rights in the West before their counterparts elsewhere. White women residing in many western states gained the franchise in the late-nineteenth century, earlier than women in other parts of the nation. This skewed gender ratio also led more white men to marry Mexican women with greater frequency in some communities in the American Southwest. Primary-source documents will provide students of a more appropriate sense of the varied roles played by frontier women as students to continue to address the question: How did family life change during the first half of the nineteenth century? Many women of diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds felt trapped or limited by their gender in a place and time so dominated by men. Some women responded to this by working for social change. California’s Annie Bidwell promoted women’s rights—especially suffrage—temperance, and compulsory education. Other women confronted this society by passing as or transforming themselves into men, thus benefiting from the greater opportunities men had in the West. California’s Charley Parkhurst, for example, who was born as a female but who lived as a male, drove stagecoach routes in northern and central California for almost 30 years. Stagecoaches were the only way many people could travel long distances, and they served as a vital communication link between isolated communities.  Parkhurst was one of the most famous California drivers, having survived multiple robberies while driving (and later killing a thief when he tried to rob Parkhurst a second time). Parkhurst wore a patch over one eye, the result of a kick in the face by a horse. After Parkhurst died in 1879, a coroner discovered that “One-eyed Charley” was actually a woman and mother. Finally, gold rushes and western military life provide examples of frontier settings where men far outnumbered women and for this and many reasons, people lived less conventional lives.

The Causes, Course of, and Consequences of the Civil War
Why was there a Civil War?
How did the United States transform during the Civil War?
How was the Civil War conducted militarily, politically, economically, and culturally?
How was slavery abolished through the Civil War?
Sidebar: The History Blueprint: Was the Civil War for Freedom?
The History Blueprint is a free curriculum developed by the California History-Social Science Project (http://chssp.ucdavis.edu), designed to increase student literacy and understanding of history. Three units are available for free download from the CHSSP’s website, including The Civil War, a comprehensive standards-aligned unit for eighth grade teachers that combines carefully selected and excerpted primary sources, original content, and substantive support for student literacy development. For more information or to download the curriculum, visit: http://chssp.ucdavis.edu/programs/historyblueprint.
In this unit, students concentrate on the lead up to, conduct of, and consequences of the Civil War. By 1850 slavery had become too divisive for political leaders to ignore; a series of increasingly violent clashes over the decade shone a spotlight on how slavery as a political, economic, and social institution divided the country and would become the cause for an American Civil War. Students can begin their studies of the lead up to the Civil War by exploring this question: Why was there a Civil War? Students can briefly review the constitutional compromises that forestalled the separation of the union in the first half of the nineteenth century, especially the Missouri Compromise. But the compromises of the 1810s-1840s did not last. Ultimately, the nation fractured over the debate about the expansion of slavery into newly created western territories and states, especially after the Mexican-American War and the discovery of gold in California. The Wilmot Proviso, the Compromise of 1850, the Kansas-Nebraska Act, the Ostend Manifesto, the Dred Scott case, the Lincoln-Douglas debates, and John Brown’s raid on Harper’s Ferry are all important markers in how slavery had become the key problem dividing political leaders. Students can chart these developments in the years leading up to the Civil War, noting on the one hand, how the issue of slavery was at the root of each event, but on the other hand, how political leaders sought to avoid war at all costs.  Studying these events in this nuanced way is an exercise in understanding contingency and cause and effect; for example, political leaders who worked out the negotiations in the Compromise of 1850 did not want the country to divide and lapse into war, nor did they know that their series of compromises in 1850 would ultimately pave the way for this war. This is an important reminder for students to “think historically” to study the past on its own terms, but also understand how it would influence future events.
On December 20, 1860 South Carolina became the first state in the nation to secede from the union. The state’s secession came in response to the presidential election of Abraham Lincoln the prior month, even though he was not to take office until March of 1861. South Carolina decided that Lincoln’s presidential win as a Republican – a party that supported the Free Soil platform, not the end of slavery in territories that it already existed – signaled that it could not continue as part of the United States. South Carolina was joined by twelve other states in the coming months, which united together and formed the Confederate States of America in March 1861. Students learn about the fundamental challenge to the Constitution and the Union posed by the secession of the southern states and the doctrine of nullification. When Lincoln took office the same month that the Confederacy formed he said his first task was to reunite the nation; he did not support freeing slaves in the south at this point. It became clear that war was likely a necessary step to attempt reunification, which happened at Fort Sumter, South Carolina, when, between April 12-14, 1861, Lincoln refused to withdraw American troops stationed at this American fort. With the first shots of the Civil War fired, students should be encouraged to understand three key pieces of historical context: 1) at the war’s beginning, it was unpopular among northerners, and the extremely high casualty rates continued to make it an unpopular war; 2) the South seceded because they perceived Lincoln’s election to be a threat to the institution of slavery; and 3) at the war’s beginning the purpose of it was not to end slavery, but to reunite the nation. With this context in mind, students will learn through cause and effect and contingency that the purpose of the war did change to be a war to end slavery.
Students should continue to study the development and administration of the Civil War by employing the discipline-specific thinking skills of contingency and cause and effect. These two questions can help frame this way of understanding the Civil War: How did the United States transform during the Civil War? How was the Civil War conducted militarily, politically, economically, and culturally? Students should be reminded often that actors in the war – whether it was political or military leaders, soldiers, slaves, civilians – did not know how the war would develop, what the results would be, or that slavery would come to a decisive end within four years. At the outset of the war, the North and the South each had different advantages and strategies. The North, with its 3.8 million free men of military age, had a much larger pool of potential servicemen; it had ten times the industrial capacity as the south; it had more than double the miles of railroad line to transport people and goods; it had many more ships and a navy; it also had West Point, the premier military academy in the country to train leaders in the midst of the war. By comparison, the South had 1.1 million free men of military age, of which 80% of whom were recruited for war; it did not have the industrial capacity that the north did because the region had devoted the vast majority of its economic and technological energy to the cash crop of cotton. The South also had talented graduates of West Point leading its soldiers who were more familiar with the landscape, and they fought most of the war on the defensive, which at least initially seemed to be a more winnable war to fight. In addition to these strategic advantages and disadvantages, the Civil War demonstrated the advantages of a strong central government when facing the challenges of organizing a nation for war. The coercive powers of the federal government to levy taxes, draft soldiers, and suspend civil liberties, and impose martial law all enabled President Lincoln in prosecuting the war. Jefferson Davis and the Confederacy relied upon a weak central government and the voluntary cooperation of state governments for the cause of southern independence. These differences proved a decided advantage in favor of the North.
Students can be introduced to key battles including Antietam, Vicksburg, Gettysburg that served as turning points in the war, though as they explore the up-close details of the battlefield, they should also be reminded to view the events with the broader historical significance in mind by revisiting a central question: How did this battle of affect the course of the war? How did this battle reflect broader patterns or struggles in the war? In addition to studying the critical battlefield campaigns of the war, students learn how modern technologies of warfare combined with antiquated military tactics to produce massive casualties on both sides. The hundreds of thousands of sick and wounded required medical attention, which in turn created a shortage of people to care for these soldiers. This acute need precipitated a crisis that led to the large scale employment of women as nurses and administrators, and in the case of Mary Edwards Walker, a female doctor. Students use a variety of primary sources to examine the human meaning of the war in the lives of soldiers, free African Americans, slaves, women, and others. Ultimately, enslaved men and women, by fleeing their plantations and seeking refuge among Union forces, contributed to redefining the war as a struggle over their freedom. Photographs reveal the horrors of the war and the new ways that civilians experienced warfare through emerging technologies and media. Teachers may choose to assign James McPherson’s What They Fought For, 1861-1865 or teach the CHSSP’s Civil War Blueprint curriculum to introduce students to what northern and southern soldiers believed the war was about and what they hoped to achieve by fighting.
In addition to learning about the administration and battle-field developments of the war, students should come away from their studies of the Civil War with an understanding of the fact that the purpose of the war changed as it was being fought. Over the course of the war, it changed from being a war to reunite the union, to being a war to end slavery. The following framing question underscores this point for students: How and why did the war become a war to end slavery? Through self-emancipation, slaves freed themselves, fled to union camps, and pressed military leaders and the president to consider the role of slaves in the war itself. Documents including Lincoln’s first and second inaugural addresses, the Emancipation Proclamation, and the Gettysburg Address should be read and charted by students to document the change in meaning to the war.
The Civil War and its immediate aftermath should be treated as a watershed event in American history. It resolved a challenge to the very existence of the nation, demolished the antebellum way of life in the South, and created the prototype of modern warfare. To understand Reconstruction, students consider the economic and social changes that came with the end of slavery and how African Americans attained political freedom and exercised that power within a few years after the war. Students also explore the impact Reconstruction had on African American kinship structures and family life. Students study the postwar struggle for control of the South and of the impeachment of President Andrew Johnson. A federal civil rights bill granting full equality to African Americans was followed by adoption of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments. Between 1865 and 1877, African-American citizens, newly organized as Republicans, influenced the direction of southern politics and elected 22 members of Congress. Republican-dominated legislatures established the first publicly financed education systems in the region, provided debt relief to the poor, and expanded women’s rights. Students examine the effects of Reconstruction in the South by considering the question: How did Reconstruction redefine what it meant to be an American? As important as the era was in expanding civil rights in the south, Reconstruction was temporary. Students should employ cause-and-effect thinking skills to analyze the consequences of the 1872 Amnesty Act and the fateful election of 1876, followed by the prompt withdrawal of federal troops from the South.
Students analyze how events during and after Reconstruction raised and then dashed hopes that African Americans would achieve full equality. They should understand how over the next couple of decades, courts and political interests undermined the intent of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution. They learn how slavery was replaced by black peonage, segregation, Jim Crow laws, and other legal restrictions on the rights of African Americans, capped by the Supreme Court’s Plessy v. Ferguson decision in 1896 (“separate but equal”). Racism prevailed, enforced by lynch mobs, the Ku Klux Klan, popular sentiment, and federal acceptance, which spread outside of the South. Students need to understand the connection between the Reconstruction-era amendments and the civil rights movement of the 1960s. Although undermined by the courts a century ago, these amendments became the legal basis for all civil rights progress in the twentieth century. Students can conclude their studies of this era by returning to the question: How did the Civil War change the United States?

The Rise of Industrial America: 1877–1914
How did America’s economy, industries, and population grow after the Civil War?
How did the federal government affect the country’s growth in the years following the Civil War?
Who came to the United States at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth century? Why did they come? What was their experience like when they arrived?
The period from the end of Reconstruction to World War I transformed the nation into an industrial giant that made it as productive and industrialized as the major powers and producers in Europe. This complex period was marked by the settling of the trans-Mississippi West, the expansion and concentration of basic industries, the establishment of national transportation networks and new maritime routes, the invention of a variety tools and industrial processes that increased economic productivity and efficiency, a human tidal wave of immigration from southern and eastern Europe, growth in the number and size of cities, accumulation of great fortunes by a small number of entrepreneurs, the rise of organized labor, growth of the women’s suffrage movement, and increased American involvement in foreign affairs (for example, through the construction of the Pacific Fleet, engagement in the Spanish-American War of 1898, and the completion of the Panama Canal). These years are often referred to as the Gilded Age (because of the mass accumulation of wealth by small number of extremely powerful individuals and companies) and the Progressive Era (because of the reform movement that started as a way to promote the interests of those who did not share in the prosperity of those years). As a means of examining patterns of urbanization, immigration, and industrialization, students can refer to historic maps to identify physical features of American cities, building both their chronological and spatial analysis skills. Viewing historical maps in chronological order allows students to trace growth patterns of cities and to recognize how a city’s growth and industries demanded ever-increasing quantities of natural resources, gathered from increasingly greater distances.  Students can unite their studies of these years by considering the question: How did America’s economy, industries, and population grow after the Civil War?
Industrialization, the umbrella term that describes the major changes in technology, transportation, communication, the economy, and political system that fostered the growth, allowed for the ballooning prosperity at the turn of the century. New technology in farming, manufacturing, engineering, and producing of consumer goods created material abundance. The flood of new stuff supported a larger population and made the producers of the goods very wealthy when prices were stable. Industrialization combined with mass production made possible the department store, suspension bridges, the telegraph, the discovery and uses for electricity, high-rise buildings, tenements, and the streetcar. These and other features of modern life seemed to confirm the idea of unending progress. Students may examine the impact of these new inventions upon the American economy, such as the refrigerator car, the telephone, or the electric light, through the construction of a virtual museum exhibit which includes information about individual inventors, descriptions of the new invention or process, and the significance of the new discovery. In addition to individual inventions, students examine the phenomenal growth in industrial efficiency and output during this period, due to increased mechanization, and with it, reduced production costs. Mechanization and factory production reduced labor costs and expanded production capacity. As a result, manufacturers could produce more goods for a lower price using a strategically organized workforce.
As industry grew, many small businesses consolidated to form large monopolies that dominated a particular economic activity or commodity. These businesses, such as Standard Oil, often engaged in predatory pricing, where they undercut the cost of production in order to put their competitors out of business. Without competition, monopolies could then raise prices at will, effectively gauging consumers who had nowhere else to turn for their goods or services.
Economic progress was repeatedly disrupted, however, by prolonged periods of severe financial distress; the country suffered a number of economic recessions during the intense boom and bust cycles at the end of the nineteenth century. Students identify and explore patterns of agricultural, industrial, and commercial development in the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and the effect of such development on the American environment (California Environmental Principle II) and apply their knowledge of to an exploration of how increased mechanization and production in the late 19th century influenced the growth of American communities (EEI Curriculum Unit Agricultural and Industrial Development in the United States 8.12.1).
Leading industrialists of this period, such as Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller, became the wealthiest men in history and gave back some of that wealth to the nation through their philanthropic activities. Governments promoted the wealth consolidated by these men and supported business expansion and prosperity through favorable economic policies such as tariffs and land grants.
The rapid growth of the country in this period had important consequences for how people lived their lives. Beneath the surface of the Gilded Age, there was a dark side, seen in the activities of corrupt political bosses, in the ruthless practices of businesses, in the depths of poverty and unemployment experienced in the teeming cities, in the grinding labor of women and children in sweatshops, mills, and factories, in the prejudice and discrimination against African Americans, Hispanics, Catholics, Jews, Asians, and other newcomers, and in the violent repression of labor organizing, such as the Homestead Steel Strike in Pennsylvania and the Pullman Railway Strike.
Part of the reason the nation became as productive as it did in the last decades of the nineteenth century was because of a flood of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. Students can identify who migrated, why they came, how people found work, where they lived, and how they encountered this foreign country. Students can address the questions: Who came to the United States at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth century? Why did they come? What was their experience like when they arrived? They can also learn about the long hours, poor wages, unhealthy work environments, and lack of regulation on child labor, which according to author Upton Sinclair, amounted to The Jungle for the working-class. This system of labor and social organization was justified by leading social scientists, who advocated Social Darwinism, or eugenics as scientific explanation and rationalization for treating workers poorly. Students examine the importance of social Darwinism as a justification for child labor, unregulated working conditions, and laissez-faire policies toward big business.
The plight of labor and immigrants was not ignored by everyone at the turn of the century: Progressives, or American reformers who sought to provide a safety net for the most vulnerable of Americans, started to advocate for the poor through opening settlement houses like Hull House in Chicago, or working as muckraking journalists like Ida Tarbell, exposing poor working conditions. Progressives eventually advocated broader reforms in urban areas by encouraging the government to establish minimum working age requirements and passing the Pure Food and Drug Act, for example. Reformers also aligned themselves with workers themselves. Students can study the rise of the labor movement and understand the changing role of government in confronting social and economic challenges of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era. Students can review these shifts by considering the question: How did the federal government affect the country’s growth in the years following the Civil War?
Despite suffering from unsafe working and living conditions, immigrant and native-born men and women sometimes found themselves freer from family and community control in urban centers. Socializing in public became the norm for working-class youth who had limited space where they lived, and the disparity between women’s and men’s wages gave rise to the practice of dating. The rise of commercialized entertainment such as movies, amusement parks, and dance halls fostered easier interaction among strangers.
Part of the reason this larger and more urban population could be sustained was because of major shifts in the country’s geography and demography. Students focus on the developing West and Southwest between the 1890s and 1910s. Yet, in order for the west to be developed in this way, American Indians had to be once again relocated and removed in many situations. The American Indian wars, the creation of the reservation system, the development of federal Indian boarding schools, and the re-allotment of Native lands profoundly altered Native American social systems related to governance, family diversity, and gender diversity. Allotment entailed breaking up Native lands into privately held units (largely based on the Anglo-American model of the male-headed nuclear family). Boarding schools took Native children from their parents for years at a time in order to make them into proper citizens. Reading Chief Joseph’s words of surrender to U.S. Army troops in 1877 helps students grasp the heroism and human tragedy that accompanied the conquest of this last frontier.
In addition to learning about natives who were displaced for the development of the West, students study how the region was reconstructed to support the growing native and immigrant population. The great mines and large-scale commercial farming of the nation’s heartland provided essential resources for the industrial development of the nation. Advances in farming technology made land more productive than ever before, but they also led to falling crop prices, which squeezed small-time farmers who had been struggling to stay afloat. Students can learn through case studies of events, for example the Chicago World’s Fair of 1893, and identify the “modern” agricultural, industrial, and commercial development of the time. They can also describe the cause-and-effect relationships between climate, natural resources, population growth, and the scientific and technological advancements during this time period, and then apply their knowledge of these relationships to an analysis of the changing landscape in America around the turn of the century. One way farmers reacted to these technological and economic pressures was through organizing. Students can consider the political programs and activities of the Grange Movement and Populists as examples of how farmers attempted to organize in the face of larger pressures. California also came to play an increasingly significant role in the national economy. The Gold Rush in California, the building of the transcontinental railroad, and agricultural labor in Hawaii and the mainland spurred Chinese, Korean, Japanese, Filipino, Hindu, and Sikh immigration to the United States. Agricultural production and the growth of the oil industry accounted for much of California’s early economic growth. Asian farmers and laborers contributed to the development of irrigation systems and farming throughout the state. Families from Mexico increasingly provided the labor force for the cultivation of this region. Students study the social, economic, and political handicaps encountered both by immigrants and American citizens of Mexican ancestry. Eventually the Chinese Exclusion Act (1882) and the Immigration Act of 1917 greatly limited Asian entry to the United States. California built the immigration station at Angel Island to implement restrictions on Asian admissions. Despite the government’s eventual tightening of restrictions on immigration in the second decade of the twentieth century, immigrants played an essential role in developing the country as both an agricultural and industrial giant.
Literature can deepen students’ understanding of the life of this period, including the immigrant experience portrayed in Willa Cather’s My Antonia and O. E. Rolvaag’s Giants in the Earth; life in the slums portrayed in Jacob Riis’s books; the poems, journals, and journalism of Walt Whitman; and Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finn, unsurpassed as a sardonic commentary on the times.
Sidebar: Defining American Citizenship
To understand the sweeping changes that are covered in this period of American history, students consider the ways in which the quests for liberty and freedom have transformed the American populace. The course pays close attention to the opportunities and challenges that have confronted our diverse society. Teachers weave in the recurrent theme of citizenship and voting by emphasizing how these rights and privileges have been contested and reshaped over time. Starting with the freedoms outlined by the framers, students examine the many contributions of Americans seeking to expand civil rights across the country—to move forward in our continuing struggle to become a more perfect union.
Students learn what it means to be a good citizen (obeying laws), a participatory citizen (voting, jury duty, advocating causes) and a socially just citizen (community service, standing up for rights of others). Students will also learn about the process by which people not born in the United States can become citizens, the history of immigration in the United States, and the contributions of immigrants in our country. This analysis of the naturalization process will provide an understanding of the immigration process, enhance students’ tolerance of and respect for others, help students develop an appreciation for the diversity of our country, and reinforce lessons of citizenship. Finally, students can participate in service-learning projects that engage them in the democratic process such as planning and participating in such activities as mock elections, associated student body elections and meetings, the naturalization process, voter registration, community service, and National History Day.











California Department of Education
September 2015
